IN T1T
WALKER MEMORIAL
GYMNASIUM UBRARY
I '11
r~
~J"
THE TEN PRINCES
•
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICACO PRESS CHICAGO, ILUNOlS
THH BAli-Ell I: TAYLOR COMPANY "1'."Ton
THE M_\CMl~LAII COWPAIIY OF CANADA, LIMITED TOJ.Ono
THE CAMlIll.lDOF. UIiIVF.UlTT	p""'n 1.01<0011
THE M"RUZ£'HUBuSHIU-II-AUHA TOno,	.,.Al<A, "TOTO, '''''''OCA,	au	....'
TIlE COMMERCIAL PU'U,	UMIT>;D allA"""",
t
DAl-lDIN'S DASHA-KUMARA-CHARITA
THE TEN PRINCES
Translated ftm	the San.J1[rit0/ ARTHUR W RYDER
TIlE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PUSS CHICAGO ·ILLlNOIS
Col'Y1lCIIT	1927 By '~UNlVnSlrY	0_ eme..OO
All Right. Re!lerved Published September 19'7
Cam_ OIl<! Priotecl	"- The Uol .. "l.,.	01 ChlcaiD	...... ChIct.IrO> 1111001>, 11.9.A,.
TO MY LONG_PROVED FRIEND RUTH N. PETERSSQN THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED
,
(

----------------------------------------------------------------------

######################################################################

----------------------------------------------------------------------

######################################################################

----------------------------------------------------------------------

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

----------------------------------------------------------------------

@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

----------------------------------------------------------------------

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

I

Of the detail of Dandin's life we know nothing. He
perhaps flourished in the latter half of the seventh
Christian century—certainly not later. He is the author
of two works: a treatise on literary composition,
called the Mirror of Poetry; and the novel whose full
title is the _Adventures of the Ten Princes_. If, as tradition
affirms, he composed a third work, we know not
what it was. He was a skilful poet; an erudite and
ingenious lover of literature; the master of a prose style
surpassingly beautiful.

This is all that we know. Dandin has been as successful
as Homer—more successful than Shakespeare—in
baffling the impertinences of the "Who's Who"
brand of scholarship. And while a few more details
might prove piquant, it is better to know too little
than too much. In the case of truly great writers,
both understanding and enjoyment are commonly enhanced
when we have their works and have lost their lives.

II

The Mirror of Poetry is a treatise which attained,
and deserves, the position of an authority. It was
composed at a favorable moment in classical Sanskrit
literature, when masterpieces were recent and the poetic
impulse was not yet exhausted.	It treats of literary
composition both in verse and prose, giving rules
of construction in the various forms, but concerning
itself chiefly with "ornaments," that is, all figures of
speech and other devices which lend dignity and
distinction, which transform a piece of writing into true
literature.

The _Mirror of Poetry_ is itself written in verse, and
the author displays his own poetic skill by composing
almost all of his illustrative examples.

III

The Ten Princes is a prose novel in fourteen chapters.
The first chapter relates the birth of Prince
Rajavahana and the assembling at his father's court
of nine companion lads, princes or aristocrats,	all
destined in the sequel to royalty. In the second chapter,
the ten set forth to conquer the world. But when
Rajavahana disappears, the other nine scatter to
find him; and each meets with gay adventures, in the
course of which he gains a throne and a lady. The central
story recounts Rajavahana's experiences; but as
his comrades rejoin him, they report their own exploits,
so that the book becomes a collection of shorter
tales, somewhat slightly framed in the dominating
narrative.

The text has reached us in a strange form. For only
chapters vi–xiii were composed by Dandin.
Chapters i–v and chapter xiv are by other hands.
These two additions are of very different length and
character, and should therefore be described separately.

The true work of Dandin ends abruptly with
chapter xiii, leaving the adventure of Vishruta
incomplete. The fourteenth chapter supplies a somewhat
careless completion, then proceeds to a conclusion of
the main narrative. This chapter is written in a
commonplace style, and some of its statements imply a
negligent reading of Dandin's text. It is obviously
inferior. Dandin must have been interrupted, perhaps
by the strict arrest of death, and a lesser mind adds a
lame and impotent Conclusion.

Very different is the case with chapters i–v.
This extensive addition has one-third the length of the
genuine work of Dandin;	its style is exquisite; in
ingenuity of design and detail it is hardly unworthy of
Dandin himself; it is admirably welded to the main
narrative. The fifth chapter in particular, with its
harmonious blending of beauty, wit, and invention,
fuses fittingly with the work of the master. A painful
examination may indeed disclose slight stylistic
variations and reveal some trivial inferiority in
constructive skill; yet it may be doubted whether these
differences would have been detected had the book been
presented as a unit. Even as matters stand, some
have found it possible to doubt the non-authenticity
of the first five chapters. Thus we encounter a most
remarkable instance of literary collaboration: a true
masterpiece uncompleted, with an anonymous complement
hardly its inferior. Let us pay homage to the
unknown artist of chapters i–v, who was zealous
for art, not for self-exploitation; who stands a silent
rebuke—needed, if unheeded—of any age greedy for
scholarship and other stultifying self-advertisement.

The necessity of this introductory addition
presents a puzzle. While the terminal lacuna may be
naturally attributed to the author's death or other
imperious interruption, the failure to compose the
earlier chapters—which must nevertheless have been
fully blocked out in Dandin's mind—remains a mystery.
There are no grounds for assuming that they were
actually written, and the manuscript lost. It would
appear that Dandin began composition with the sixth
chapter. Further speculation is profitless since data
are lacking.

IV

There has been some investigation of the sources
which Dandin may have used for the stories which
form his book; here and there an analogy has been
found in the earlier literature. Yet the total result is
rather surprisingly negative, considering the extraordinary
wealth of Sanskrit literature in tales of diverse
nature. These dismal studies in influences and sources
may be securely left in the hands of those who have no
love for literature, since the result is always the same.
A great author uses what fits his purpose and in using
it, so transforms it as to make it his own.

It is of greater interest to observe the author's
attitude toward his gay adventurers. They are plainly
not Sunday-school heroes; several have an obvious
streak of the picaresque. In particular, the hero of the
seventh chapter—the longest and perhaps the most
winsome chapter—is an accomplished rascal. Yet he
and other rascals win the complete sympathy of the
reader by their lack of the meaner vices and virtues.
The only exception (if the translator may trust his
own feeling) is the hero of chapter viii, whose treachery
the author strives to explain by the working of
superhuman necessity. The explanation satisfies the
mind, not the heart.

The purpose of the book is the amusement of the
cultivated reader: there is no moral intention. Most
great books—_Hamlet_, or _Oedipus_, or _Shakuntala_—submit
to a moral interpretation, however removed
they may be from formal sermonizing.  Yet there are
a precious few which employ the lavish resources of
lofty art with no design save the entertainment	of the
truly cultivated. Among them are the Gilbert and
Sullivan operas, and the _Ten Princes_.

V

It is baffling business to discuss style in another
language, yet the attempt must be made. For the
_Ten Princes_ is above all else a triumph of literary
style.  Its incidents would indeed have interest if related
in commonplace fashion, but the book becomes
great by virtue of its manner.

This manner is difficult.  Dandin, like the other
Sanskrit novelists, does not employ prose because it
is easy; he probably felt it more exacting than poetry.
Being a careful student of linguistic and rhetorical
device, he commands, to begin with, the resources
(necessary, though insufficient) which yield themselves
to study. Thus he is fond of permitted, but unusual,
forms of grammatical inflection; he has an extensive,
exquisitely chosen vocabulary; he is skilful in forming
long compounds; he understands the elaboration of a
beautifully balanced sentence.  This equipment, with
full comprehension of the figures of speech, forms the
inanimate body which can receive life and charm only
from noble art.

One feature of this life-giving art is sententious
brevity, to be expected in that literature wherein an
author rejoices more in saving the half of a short
vowel than in the birth of a son As a consequence,
the book is alive with action, surprising with quick
mutation of fortune and change of scene, yet never
hurried, finding rich opportunity for lingering
description.

Most pervasive, and most indescribable, is the use
of assonance. This not infrequently proceeds to full
internal rhyme, shading away with faultless taste into
imperfect rhyme, alliteration, and other haunting
euphonies. The result is one which only the rarest prose
shares	with lofty poetry—that the phrases gain a
meaning beyond their meaning, and sing themselves
for days through any sensitive mind. Such phrases
are _kasi UaSlt kua yiisi or nagaradluatlua nagaramiisha- roshita._
These are deliberately chosen as expressions
of which the mere literal rendering leaves no impression
of profundity or passion. For the former means
only: "What is your name? What is your goal, my
soul?" and the latter: "like the city's guardian
goddess, angered at theft in the city."

But the author's most marvelous feat is the
twelfth chapter, which contains no labial sound. In
this chapter no word is employed that contains any of
the letters _u, o, p, ph, b, bh, m,_ or _v_. The translator,
lacking character for so splendid an achievement, has
adopted the shabby substitute of a somewhat more
highfalutin style.

It has been stated that Dandin's manner is difficult,
yet some qualification is necessary. His more
elaborate passages are continually set off by short,
pungent colloquialisms, just as Shakespeare does not
scruple to introduce into a melancholy meditation the
expressions: "there's the rub" and "to	grunt and
sweat under a weary life." Dundin, like Shakespeare,
desires to employ all the resources of language, the
familiar as well as the sophisticated.  In this the
translator, so far as power permitted, has followed him, not
shrinking even from occasional profanity.

A considerable difficulty is occasioned by the proper
names. These are, to be sure, easily pronounced
and euphonious; but they are numerous, long, and
foreign to the English reader. Furthermore, their
literal meaning is not infrequently played upon; yet it
seemed only rarely advisable to translate them. Thus
one of the peculiar graces of the original becomes an
unavoidable embarrassment of the translation.

Further discussion of style would tend to little
profit. The author of the _Mirror of Poetry_ had at
disposal all the resources of literary refinement. In the
employment of those resources, we may say of him, as
he of one of his own characters: "He made masterpieces
his model, and undertook what was feasible
yet ideal."

    Arthur W. Ryder,
    Berkeley, California
    April, 1927


XI. MtTRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE XII. MANTRAOUPTA'S ADVENTURE.	,85
W. RYDER
IX. ARTHAPALA'S ADVENTURE X. PR.UfATI'S ADVENTURE.
I. THE II. THE BRAHMAN'SSERVICE
PRINCES	ARE	BORN
III. SoMADA'ITA'S ADVENTURE IV. PUSHP6oBHAVA'S ADVENTURE.
35 V. THE MARRIAGE OF THE BELLE OF AVANTI	'5
VI. RAJAVAHAtU'S ADVENTURE	59 VII. APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	69 VIII. UPAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	<07
XIII. VfSHRUTA'S AOVENTURE XIV. CONCLUSION. INDEX OF PROPER NAMES
'99
"5
'35
xv
'57
•
May	evrrlasting	joy	De rhine, Confmed by Vjs/mu'! loot dioine,
Which, when it trod 1M deci/s j!aJ. Became the staff oj this and filar:
The staff around which is unJurled The sunshade oj flu 'i(Jing world;
Tht flagstaff jar the sil/un gleam Of sacred Ganges' deatMus stream;
The mast ojlarth'sjar-driuen	ship, Round which the stars (as axis) dip;
The lotus stallc of Br(Jhma's shrine;
CHAPTER I
THE PRINCES ARE BORN
There was once a metropolis called Blossom City, the very diadem of Magadha land, and a touchstone testing all proud cities; for it made credible the high magnificence of the sea in.its wealth of gems and other such objects ever displayed in its countless commod- ities.
In this city lived a king named Rajahansa. His stout, uplifted arm seemed like Mount Mandara churning the sea-his sea the whole hostile host, wherein billows of sturdy soldiers figured the crested waves; horses and elephants the fearful sharks. He was wrapt in the perfume of a glory so pervasive that it plugged the chinks of the horizon-a	glory that formed the theme of eager song for throngs of dear and dainty companions of gods absorbed in sauntering
through groves in the city courts of heaven's king- a glory with as white a figure as autumn moonlight or jasmine blossom, as camphor, hoarfrost, or pearl, as
lotus stalk or swan or celestial elephant, as water, milk, God Shive's laughter, Mount Kailasa, or kasba grass. He was blest with a bridegroom's bliss in being wedded to the earthowho wears for girdle the tide of ocean set with gems as massive and magnificent as heaven's peak. Through fees for endless sacrifices he
Thefsdcncmed
stal! oj life dioine.
THE TEN PRINCES
gave protection to throngs of Brahmans abounding in the high discipline of the sciences. He ever emulated the sun in a radiance that tortured his foes. And the winsomeness of his unblemished beauty was own brother to the charm of haughty Love.
This king had a wise and lovely queen named Va- sumati, the central jewel in the chaplet of dainty ladies. She made it seem that charming woman had been frightened into blamelessness when fierce-eyed Shiva reduced the love-goo's life to ashes. For her mass of hair was black as clustered bees; and her face) a mine for love's quarrying and a moon of light) left lotuses forlorn. Her eyes were like two paired and flashing fishes figured on Love's banner.	Her sigh was a breeze fro~ Malabar) a soldier to lay all soldiers low; and her red lip was a flower, yet a sword to pierce the hearts of lovelorn loiterers. Her supple, comely neck was a conch of victory; her breasts seemed two well- filled bowls, or a pair of sheldrake birds' her arms ,:ere perilous as bowstrings, yet in unrival~d softness like two clinging lotus stalks. Her navel seemed a
lovely lotus bud just ready to flower or an eddy in Ganges• stream.	Her generous hips, 'true chariots of co~quest, postponed the ambitions of meditative saints. Her pe.rfect thighs, twin columns of victory, seemed pl~~tam stems to stem ascetic progress. Her fee~ ,:"ere lilies,	an	antidote	for	heat.	And	all	her	re- mammg members see~ed flowers, and weapons, too.
Such was Vasumari, lapped in a wealth of end-
THE PRINCES ARE BORN	3
less delight like the earth. And with the earth, she brought happiness to the king of Magadha, as he dwelt in Blossom City, more lovely than the heavenly
city.	. Now the king had three ancestral counselors, su-
premely loyal, and of an intelligence so pro~ound that they had doubts about sharing in enterpns~s under consideration by the adviser of the gods. Their names were Dharmapala, Pndmodbhava, and Sitavarman.
The sons of Siravarman were Sumati and Satya- varman. The sons of Dharmapala were Sumantra, Sumitra, and Karnapala. The sons of Padmodbhava were Sushruta and Ratnodbhava.
Of these Satyavarman was pious; and having perceived the hollowness of one life after another, he wandered, a passionate pilgrim. Kamapala was naughty, so disregarded the counsel of fathe: and el- der brother and roamed the earth, a connoisseur of gay dogs, actors, and purchasable females. Ratnod-
bhava had a talent for trade and sailed the sea. The other sons of counselors, when their fathers became permanent guests in the heavenly city, lived without
change. Now it chanced that the lord of Magadha went
forth to war. His shafts were sharpened by skimming the skulls of princes in countless battle~ delivere.d with skilful use of weapons effective and diverse. H1S foe was the monarch of Malwa, overweening Mana- sara, a glutton for conflict renewed. The jangling roll
4
TIlE TEN PRJ CES
THE PRINCES ARE BORN	5
ing, heard the words: "Pluck, together with the king, the fruit of the vine of your desire." Straightway she conceived, and her lover's longing fiowered. The king in turn, more blest than God Indra, summoned the circle of friendly monarchs and celebrated the cere- mony of the parting of the queen's hair in a fashion
befitting his blessings and his longings. One day, surrounded by worthy friends, counsel-
ors, and chaplains, the virtuous king was sitting on the lion-throne when a doorkeeper, with dutiful hands upon his brow, spoke with fit deference: "Your Maj- esty, there waits at the door a holy monk desirous of an interview and deserving of due honor from Your Majesty." Permission being granted, the ascetic was
introduced. Now the king, seeing him approach, readily recog-
nized a spy disguised, dismissed all menials (though retaining his counselors) and, as the fellow hawed, said with a quizzical smile: "Well, holy sir, you roam the land in wise disguise. Tell us what you have learned in this spot or in that."
So the artist in expression, humbly bowing, said:
"Your Majesty, I bent my head to Your Majesty's command, assumed this blameless garb, penetrated the capital of the lord of Malwa, and lived there in complete secrecy, not returning without full intelli- gence of that king's doings. Haughty Manasara, hav-
ing suffered defeat at your hands in that struggle that checked his army's march to old age, was sunk in
of the royal dru"msfound fun in downing the egotistical bellow of the ocean, so that the whole herd of ele- phants in heaven was shaken in a passion of fear at ~hat fiercehearing. He led an army with all four serv- Ice branches, bending beneath its weight the weight of e~rth, afflicting the mighty head of the earth-sup-
portmg serpent king. Filled with battle-lust and mighty rage the monarch marched.
And the king of Malwa, with a numerous host of elephants, took his determination like conflict incar- nate and came forth again to face him.
Thereupon the two joined battle in a veil of dust that faded confusedly into the sky. It rose from the earth, powdered by wheel and hoof and its base was bathed i~ichor-streams that flowed from the temples of thronging elepha ts. It seemed	'	'
n s. t seeme a tent WIth curtains formed by bevies of heavenly nymphs come to select new lovers. Meanwhile, every chink in the horizon
was deafened by th	di	f d	' .	e In 0	rums, drowning all other
~OU~dsIn heaven. There, knife to knife and hand to and. the two armies slaughtered and were alaugh- tere . In that battle the king of Malwa saw his whole
army waste away	d h'	If ki	f	an imse captured alive. But the
~ng 0 Magadha mercifully reinstated him in hi kmgdom.
s
Yetourking th . dl d	,aug
h h	. t e unrivaled lord of the sea
~~she	earlth, was childless, and ceaselessly besough~
nu, so e source of life in all th
his queen, beholdin	ah	"	e world. Presently gappy	VISiontoward the daWI14
6
TIlE TEN PRINCES
THE PRINCES ARE BORN
yet the ruler of Malwa, intently bent on victory, was beforehand in hurling upon him the club of Shiva's giving. This club, though chipped by a flight of sharp opposing shafts, killed the driver-lest	Shive's com- mand be unfulfilled-	and stretched the king senseless on the chariot floor. Then the horses, unhurt but un-
guided, carried the chariot by lucky chance into the wood where the women had taken refuge. Mean- while, the king of Malwa, embracing victory, overran
the rich realm of Magadha and occupied Blossom
City. Now when the ministers, worn by many wounds,
yet by lucky chance not dead, regained a painful con- sciousness in the cool breeze of dawn, they sought everywhere but did not find the king, so returned in deep depression to the queen. And Vasumati, learn-
ing from them the destruction of the whole army and the disappearance of the king, in dreadful distress, sunk in a sea of misery, determined to follow her be-
loved in dea tho Yet she was dissuaded by counselors and chap-
lains, who said with sententious concinnity: «Beauti- ful queen, the death of earth's delight is not yet ascer- tained. Furthermore, you hold in pledge the delicate life of a lovely prince-to-be, who, the astrologers pre- dict, shall rule all earth and crush proud foes. Hence you may not die today."	She said no more, but faded
fast. However, at dead of night, when her servants' eyes
shame and lost to pity. He propitiated God Shiva Kali's undying lover, who dwells in Mahakala	won his favor by mighty penances, and received from him a fearful .dub that kills infallibly one brave enemy. Puffed with the, pride of imagined invincibility, he prepares to assail you. Further decision rests with Your Majesty."
Pondering. this .report and perceiving the purpose o~ the,f0e, hIS ~misters respectfully besought the kl?g:	Your Majesty, a fighting foe draws near, be-
f~lended by a god whom there is no resisting.	At this
tlll~e a fight would be untimely.	We should beat a
quick retreat to a fortress" But 'or all thei I di h.	...'	I'	errpeamg
te.kmg,atrue,kmg1~high-pitchedpride,disdained th~lr counsel as inadmissible and fixed his thou	h
resistance.	g t on Then presu.mptuous Manasara, with full eq ui
rnent and bearmg Shiva's mighty mid	h	p- nacio	d unhi	ace, e	15 pug- o	'" vangu.a~ unhmdered into Magadha. At news
~ this	the	mm.lsters.prevailed	on	Magadha's	lordl ~~nags~or~ly agam.sthis will, to deposit the royalladi~
d pot in the Vmdhya forest inaccessible to enemies
an to guard them with thek
bulk of th B R'	earmy.
ur ajahansa with	. k d
darted	forth	to
C • e a~ndplucky force,
ar'rest	th a
clash of two heroic h d e nous oe. Then in the atre s awake .	der i	" ous gods drawn b	'	mng won er In CUrl-
Magadha rivaled ~h:h~o:~ectacle, tho~gh the lord of graced by the hand!'	f of heaven 10 a battle-skill
mg 0 weapons sturdy and d" ~.u Iverse,
7
•
8	THE TEN PRJ 'CES	1
were s~oothed by slumber, unable to cross her lonely sorrow s.shoreless sea, she crept cautiously from the ~:mp wltho~t an atom of noise to a neighboring fig · ee near :-rh1Ch. the royal coursers, grown weary and Impotent In their burdened and bewildered flight had
~~~~toa~to~.Toabranchofthistree-it seem~dto each S signature-she	fastened one-half her up-
THE PRINCES ARE BORN	9
swooned, had been brough t to the wood, and how the
breeze of dawn had restored him. Then all the counselors. with festive deference,
brought him to the camp at a propitious moment and extracted every splinter. Whereupon the king's lotus- face blossomed and his wounds were quickly healed.
Nevertheless, since his manly effort had been frus- trated by hostile fate, the lord of Magadha was sunk in gloom, growing more and more morose until, with the consent of the counselors, Vasumati consoled him with her gentle voice and her wisdom: "0 King,
among all kings of earth you are most glorious and most eminent, yet you hide today in the depths of the Vindhya forest. Thus fortune seems a glittering water bubble, a lightning flash that gleams and goes. Per- ceive how all things hang from fate. Nay, in olden days uncounted lords of earth who rivaled great Indra in lordliness-I	name but Harishchandra	and Rama-r-
felt the full turn of the screw of pain while fate pulled the cord, yet lived long to rule their realms thereafter. So shall it be with you. Ponder for a time the working of fate, and dispel your gloom."
Then, with all his soldiers, Rajahansa paid a visit to a hermit named Vamadeva, pious, even radiant in piety, hoping thus for the fulfilment of his longing. He bowed before the hermit, received a hospitable greet- ing, spoke as propriety prescribed, dwelt a little
in the restful hermitage. At last Rajahansa, longing
per garment, to serve as Death'a instrum	then i ib db	enr, enIn
mon hun eauty lamented with a tear-choked sweet- ness t at made th	koo'
m ki	,e	cue 00 S coo seem tasteless: "0 y l~gL,ove s brother in beauty, in my birth-co-be
b e	agam	my	beloved."
Hereupon the kin wh h d loss of blood but h dr 0 a swooned from copious
·	a recovered be	h	1 mg moonbeams	disti	neat	coo J stream-
) lstmgUlshed the v	.	. 'Ivcen and gently called h	. ery ~OIce of his love. She d	d	. er name With lavish words of
artetohimhI f with the	. k .	,er	otus- ace blossoming
.	quic JOyofherheart Sh d khi .
WIth fasting eyes that did	'.	e	ran	tm In
chaplains and th	I no~ wink. She called the ecounse orsWith I d . .
showing him to th	Th	a au -prercmg cry, . em.entheI
when the driver perish' d	~frl ajesty, the horses, ·h e,swl'ybhh.
their brows touch d h'	r e terrteet
counse ors bowed till . dh
Providence and 'd" ,.. sal' Yor M'
Into t ewood." And th .	roug t t echariot
diers had been [ai . b err ruler related how his sol- samm attle h h hi smitten by the c1 b "1	' ow e imself had been
Malwa who rejoi~edP;tl ~~~y ~urled by the king of n	Iva s favor, how he had
J
praise	t e power of
p
10	THE TEN PRINCES
for that kingdom of the lunar line which he adorned. spoke well-weighed words: "Holy sir. through (ate's great power Manasara has vanquished me and enjoys the realm that should be mine to cherish. Hence I have come to a self-subduing saint, in the thought that
I too may sternly subdue the senses, thus through your generous mercy to eradicate my enemy."
But the hermit (to whom past, present, and future were rev.eal.ed) said to the king: "No need, my friend, of emaciatmg self-denial. In Vasumati's womb lies one who shall infallibly delight the king and destroy the whole host of foes. Endure for a space." At once the words "It is true" were spoken by a voice in heav- en. And the king embraced the hermit's promise.
Presently, when the days of her pregnancy were
past, Vasumati gave birth at an auspicious moment
to a son marked with all marks of royalty. And
t~roug~ a chaplain, Brahma's peer in holiness, the
kmg, mm~ful of ~is duty, gave the name Rajavahann
to. the dainty prince radiant in infant baptism and trinkets fit for a baby boy.
THE PRINCES ARE BORN
king a certain dainty prince, radiant with the marks of royalty and a delight to the eyes, said with much emotion: "0 joy of earth, when I entered the wood to gather sacred grass and fagots, I beheld an unprotect-
ed woman shedding the tears of patent misery. And when I asked her: 'Why do you weep in a wild wood?' she wiped away her tears with her lotus-hands and sobbed out her story: 'Hermit, the kingofVideha sur-
passes the love-god in beauty, and his glory is.the theme of gathered gods. He, with queen and prmce, came to Blossom City-since	the king of Magadha was his friend-for	the festival of the parting of the queen's hair. After a time, the king of Malwa, strong in Shive's favor, came to assail the king of Magadha-
Between these two famous champions arose an incal- culable conflict, in which King Praharavarman	of Vi- deha stood beside his friend until his own contingent was shattered.	He was then seized by the victor, but dismissed for mercy or merit, and started for his capi-
tal with such tattered troops as had survived the slaughter.	Then, on the rough road through the forest he was fiercely assailed by a savage multitude, pro-. tected the women wirh the bulk of his force, and
barely escaped. " 'Now I had been chosen to nurse his twin baby
boys, and I could not keep pace with the swift flight of the king, nor could my daughter.	At that moment, like wrath incarnate, a tiger, open_mouthed, leaped snuffling toward me. In terror I tripped on a spur of
h At the very same time charming sons were born to t e counselors Sumati Sumantra S·	d S
h	"	urrutra,	an	u- s ruta. They shone like the new moon at its risin
they were destined to long life and thei	g, Pra	.	.	,r	names were
Wit~a~, Mltragupta, Mantragupta, and Vishruta.
t ese sons of counselors as his friends Rn] ava-
h.nagr··	" ew up, enJoymg the sports of boyhood.
Now one day a certain hid	. JOy	man, ehvering to the
II
-
12	TIlE TEN PRINCES
rock and fell. The baby dropped from my hands be- neath a cow.that lay there dead. While the tiger tugged hungrily at the body, he was killed by a shaft from a bow. And the baby, his hair all tousled was seized by the savages and taken I know not w'here. Nor. do I know what became of my daughter, who earned the twin prince. So I swooned, recovering in the hut of an amiable shepherd who healed my hurts. When I recovered, I felt I must find the king, but I ~m perplexed. ] have no companion	and my daughter 15 lost.' This story she told, then added: '1 will go to my.~aster alone,' and started on the spot.
,The:reupon,grieved at the sorrow of Your Maj- esty s.friend, ,the lord of Videha, I sought the prince, the. scion of his line. In my search I came to a shining ~nne of the Drea~ful Goddess, where wild savages
ere about to sacrifice the prince to the goddess, in hope of ~ lo~g succession of such victories. 'How
'Sh 11	1 h hi . a wesas tm
13
shall we kill him!' they debated ,h
Wit aswordasheh	f PI	.	.	angs rom
th anthisfeetinasandbankandm k h' h
f If	aeimtetarget o a ight of sharpened shafts? Or Jet him run the
gau2~~t o~a ~any-legged pack of frisky curs?'
an a denB shatdto them: 'Most noble savages, ] am ge ramanIblund df
wild and dreadful' wood an~~a'drom my ~ath in the Spotwhile I we	.	.	I	my SOnIn a shad y I h	h nt a little distance to recover the trail
ave searc ed hut cannot find h h	' who	seized	him	M	were	e	wen t	Or
e branch of a tree?
. any days have passed without
THE PRINCES ARE BORN
sight of his face. What shall I do? Where shalll go? Can it be that you gentlemen have seen him?'
" 'Most worthy Brahman,' they replied, 'we have one here. Can he really be your own? If so, take him.' And, fate being kind, they let me have him. I gave them my blessing, took the boy, restored him with cool water and what little I had. Now I trustfully
bring him to your bosom. You resemble the prince's father. Pray protect him." And the king, moderating a little his grief at his friend's misfortune by the pleasure of seeing this source of his friend's joy, named the boy Upaharavarman and cherished him as he did Rajavahana.
On a certain holy day the king, traveling to bathe at a place of pilgrimage, passed a hut of the wild folk; and beholding a surpassingly beautiful boy being fondled by a woman, he was so overcome with curios- ity that he questioned her: "My good girl, that lad is splendidly handsome and bears all the marks of royal-
ty. He is not born of your breed. Whose eyes should he delight? How has he come into your hand? You must tell the truth." And the wild woman bowed low, replying prettily: "0 King, when the king of Videha-he	looked like the king of heaven-was	on
the trail near our village, a band of our wild fellows looted all he had, and my husband seized this prince and gave him to me to rear." Then the sagacious king, after reflection, inferred this to be the second prince mentioned in the hermit's narration, wheedled
p
TIlE TEN PRINCES
the woman with flattery and something more sub- stantial, gave the boy the name Apaharavarman,	and entrusted him to the quecn's care.
On another day a pupil of Vamadeva, one Soma- devasharman, delivered a baby boy to the king, say- in?: "Your Majesty, on my return from a bathing pil- grimage at Ramatirtha, I saw in a stretch of forest an ~ld wo~an who carried a splendid boy, and I said po- lttel~: Who .are you, mother? Why do you wander weanly, holdmg a boy, here in the midst of the forest?'
" 'Worthy hermit/ said the old woman, 'there is a land beyond the sea named Kalayavana where dwells a merchant named Kalagupta, wealthy and worthy, who has. a dear daughter, a delight to the eyes, named Suvritta. She married a handsome man of affairs from this country,	son of a counselor of Mn- gadha's king, a man of charming virtue named Ra-
tnodb~ava, a tireless traveler; and she brought him a splendid dowry. In course of time, when his graceful l~dy	beca.me pregnant,	Racnodbhava,	homesick	for	a sight of his brother, somehow persuaded his father-in- la~ and embarked with his lovely bride for Blossom City. O? the voyage the ship was buffeted by mon- strous billows and foundered	NIh	d b	h
THE PRINCES ARE BORN	'5
vtitta bore her son here in the midst of the forest. She swooned with the pangs of labor and is lying in the cool shade of a tree. And since it was not possible to stay in the wild wood, 1 undertook to find a path lead- ing to some settlement;	but it seemed wrong to leave the baby beside his unconscious mother, so I brought
the boy too.' "At this moment a wild elephant appeared. In
terror at the sight she dropped the boy and ran, while I waited developments	from the shelter of a neighbor- ing thicket of vines. While the huge elephant was gathering the baby, like a mouthful of green stuff, from the ground, a lion with a fearful roar fastened his fierce grip upon him. Mad with fright, the ele- phant tossed the boy so that he fell from the sky. Yet
long life was predestined,	for a monkey perched on a lofty branch, picked him with the notion that he was ripe fruit. Finding him quite unlike fruit, the monkey flung him down at the base of a broad branch and made off. The baby, a glorious fellow, took all his
troubles unhurt.	And when the lion had killed the ele- phant, he tOOdeparted. I then issued from my thick- et and contrived to retrieve from his tree the baby, who seemed splendor solidified. I searched far in the forest for his mother, but failing to find her, took the boy and told my teacher, at whose command I bring him to you."
And the king, marveling at the simultaneous good fortune of all his friends, yet anxious concerning the
~onur~e my lady languid with her burden, so I bore
her up In my hands, bestrode a plank, and came some- owsafetoshore Wh th R odbh
. h hi	.	.	e	er	atn	ava was drowned :It	Iskfnendsor by what means he came to land I o not now. Today, at the last limit of misery, Su-
. ow a eencosen
»
16	THE TEN PRI CES
father's fate, gave Ratnodbhava's	son the name Push. podbhava, and handing the boy to his uncle Sushrura, told the tale of adventure with mingled grief and joy.
Another day Vasumnti appeared before her be- loved with a boy on her bosom. And when he asked: "Where does this one come from?" she replied:
. "Last night, my king, when my eyes were sealed In slumber, a heavenly lady laid a princely boy before me, awakened me, and said with deference:	'OQueen, I a~ a lady of the Yaksha demigods. 1 am called Tara- yah, dear daughter of Manibhadra, and the beloved
of. your	counselor	Kamapala,	son	of	Dharrnapala- With the consent of the Yaksha king I have brought you this chil.dof my body, that he m~y loyally attend Y,Qurson Rajavahana, that pure treasure of glory, des-
tlne~ lor~ of the lands of the sea-girdled earth. Pray ~her~shhim as you would the god of love.' And while paid her honor, my eyes aflower with wonder	that
sw:et-glancing Yaksha lady vanished." Her;upon Rajahansa, his mind amazed that Kamapala had ~on a x:-aksha bride. summoned the amiable counse-
or Sumitra, gave him his own nephew (with the name Arthapala) and told him the whole strange adventure.
,O~ yet, another day a pupil who lived in Yamade- ve s ermlta~e produced a dainty blossom of a boy
THE PRINCES ARE BORN
woman who wept as she clasped to her breast a tou- sle-headed boy. 'Who are you, mother?' I said. 'Whose are the eyes that delight in this boy? Why did you enter the wild wood? What is the source of your sor-
row?' "She wiped away her tears with both hands, gazed
at me as at one able to pluck the dart of her sorrow, and told me that sorrow's source: 'Brahman, Raja- hansa had a counselor named Siravarman, whose younger son Satyavarman	came as a pilgrim to this region. On a certain land-grant he married a Brah- man's daughter named Kali, but as she was childless. he wedded her sister Gauri, a girl of golden beauty. who bore him a son. One day the jealous Kali enticed
the boy and me. his nurse, on some pretext and flung us into this river. I clutched the boy with one hand and paddled with the other until I caught the branch of a tree swept down by the current. I laid the boy upon it and was floating down stream when I was stung by a black snake that cowered in the tree. The
who appropnated the glory of the god	d	d mock f La ' d	s an rna e a
"For all my heartfelt pity I failed to conjure the poison away with my texts from Scripture. and when I searched for a curative herb in the neighboring jun- gle, I returned only to find life departed. Thereupon
o	ve s	eadly beauty	"Y	M"	" h id "	.	our	ejesty,	e
sal • on the occasio	f	'1' bank of th K	.n0 a P'gnmage I came to the
e aven• where I encountered an aged
tree of my refuge stranded at this spot. But the ven- om burns. I am already dead, and there is none to protect him in the forest. Such is my sorrow.' With these words she fell to the ground, her limbs twitching with pain from the pitiless poison.
p
18
THE TEN PRINCES
THE PRINCES ARE BORN
I performed the holy ceremony of cremation and took in charge the helpless boy, though my mind was dis- traught with grief. Perceiving the hopelessness of a search after Satyavarman, since, when I heard his story, I had not learned the name of the land-grant where he lived, I reflected that you were the natural protector of your minister's son, hence I have brought
him to you." Upon hearing this tale, the king was distressed by his clueless ignorance of Saryavarmnn's whereabouts, so delivered the boy (whom he named Somadatta) to an uncle, the counselor Suman, who lavished upon him the care and affection that he felt
for his own brother. So, with a band of princely boys about him, Raj a-
vahana enjoyed the sports of boyhood. went riding on everything that could be ridden, and in due course en- dured the hair-clipping, investiture, and the other sac- raments. From appropriate professors the boys learned
the whole art of writing and mastered all the local dia- lects,. The~ became versed in complete Scripture with the SIX ancillary disciplines; proficient also in all tra- ditional tales,not to mention poetry, drama, romances, novels, mythology, and the more elaborate fiction. Th:y became er~dite in ethics, grammar, astronomy,
l~glc, metaphys:c~, and all related subjects. They digested the writings of Kautilya, Kamandaki, and o.ther works on the prudent conduct o(life. They cul- tivated a gift for the lute and other musical instru-
ments, adding a talent for choral singing and the
science of rhetoric. They mastered the mysterious powers of gems, magical spells, and drugs. They ex- celled in equitation, as well as in riding elephants and other creatures. They perfected themselves in the
I	technique of various weapons and acquired a scientific skill in thievery, gambling, and the arts of deception in general.
Hence, when the king beheld that princely band, radiant in youth and diligent in duty, he thought: "It is rough on my enemies," and straightway experienced
the extremity
of joy.
CHAPTER II THE BRAHMAN'S SERVICE
One day Vamadeva came before the king who sat surrounded by his band of princely lads-a high-bred brotherhood, graced with all graces, who cast a doubt upon the love-gad's beauty and made a mock of the war-gad's spirit of daring; whose hands, furthermore, bore the plain marks of royalty, the banner, the sun- shade, and the thunderbolt.	The king bowed his head
in accepted deference, the black hair of the bending boys clustered like bees about the hermit's lotus-feet. Then Vamadeva warmly embraced the boys, the des-- tined destroyers of their foes; pronounced a benedic- tion well-weighed and self-fulfilling; and said :"Delight of earth, your generous son enjoys that lavish loveli- ness of youth which must seem the ripe fruit of your
ambition. Surely the time has come when he and his companions should undertake the conquest of the quarters of the world. Rajavahana is apt for any hardship. Let him march to the conquest of the quar- ters. "
When the king beheld the lads) lovely as the love- god, manly as classic heroes, capable of the wrath that reduces foes to ashes, mocking the speed of the wind, their martial dash assured him of success. He there-
fore gave the prince fit instructions, appointed the
..
•
THE TEN PRINCES
others his counselors, and at an auspicious moment dismissed them to victory.
Now Rajavahana, following a favorable prognos- tic, marched a certain distance, then plunged into the Vindhya forest. There he encountered a man whose members were maculated with welted scars, whose body was hard as iron-a Brahman betrayed by his
sacramental cord but manifesting the wild energy of a savage, a hideous sight. Yet on receiving a civil greet- ing, Rajavahana said: "Man, why do you dwell alone in the heart of the Vindhya forest, a wild wood where terror dogs the trails, fit habitation for beasts. remote
from the haunts of men? The sacred cord across your shoulder marks you a Brahman. The scars suggest a savage. Explain the paradox."
The man thereupon, believing that the glorious youth had more than mere human power, learned from the prince's companions his name and lineage, then told his own story: "0 prince, in this forest dwell many nominal Brahmans, men who abandon scriptur- al and other learning, spurn the duties of their order, put away truth, purity, and all the virtues' who seek
after sin, following the lead of savages and eating their food. ?f one of these I was the reprobate son, and my name IS Matanga. With a barbarous band 1 would e~ter settlements, seize wealthy villagers with their wives and children, imprison them in the forest plun-
der all their property, and destroy them. So I lived, a stranger to pity.
THE BRAHMAN'S SERVICE
23
\
"One day I spied a band of my companions in a desolate spot preparing to kill a Brahman; and pity pierced my heart so that T said: 'Sinners, you may not slay a Brahman.'	Red-eyed with wrath, they exhaus- ted the lexicon of abuse. Made indignant by their taunts, I fought long to save the Brahman; but they struck me down. 1 died and went to hell where I be- held the death-god seated in the midst of a great as- semblage on a lion-throne inlaid with gems, and sur- rounded by embodied spirits. I paid him honor with the rigor obsequii; buthe.regardingme,	called his coun- selor Chitragupta and said: 'Counselor, that man's death-hour has not come. His life was evil. yet he met his end defending a Brahman. From this moment the stain of sin falls from him, and his light shall arise in the doing of good deeds. Let him inspect the choicer tortures of those most deeply damned, then reassume his former form.' So Chitragupta exhibited here and there those bound to red-hot posts of iron, those flung into broad saucers of boiling oil. those brayed by clubs, those chiseled by sharp-edged adzes. then dis- missed me after deducing an admirable moral.
"Reassuming	my former form, I found myselflying for a moment on a rock in the heart of the great forest, under the eye of the Brahman now performing his de- votions. Soon after, kinsmen of my caste learned the adventure. hastened to me, took me to a dwelling, and healed my hurts. The grateful Brahman did not de- part until he had taught me to read, had epitomized
5
THE TEN PRINCES
for me various Scriptures, had given me moral in- struction as a detergent of unrighteousness, had opened to me the worship of that Shive accessible to the eye of true faith, and had received from me the reverence due a teacher. From that hour I turned my
back on the whole company of kinsmen who associate with savages; I ponder prayerfully that moon-brewed Shiva who is all life's sole master; I dwell in this wild wood a stranger to iniquity. Your Majesty, I have a
secret for your ear alone. Come with me." He withdrew the prince from his comrades, and continued: "0 King, before this morning's dawn Shiva
drew near as I slept; broke the seal of my slumber, his
countenance lovely and serene; and spoke to me as I • bowed low in veneration: 'Matanga, by the bank of a stream in the heart of the Dandaka forest, behind a
crystal symbol of my divinity adored by heavenly saints and angels, near a rock marked by the foot- ~rints of Himalaya's daughter, a certain cave opens Iike the mouth of Brahma. Upon entering, you will find	there	deposi ted	a	copper	pla teo	Consider	ita	de-
cree of the Creator, perform the fate-compelling cere- mony thereon described, and you shall become lord of the lower world. Your companion in the adventure is a p~ince who will arrive today or tomorrow.'	Sir, your
arrl~al f~l:filsthe divine decree. Make me happy by befnending my ambition."
I.Ie b~wed his head. Rajavahana assented and, leaving his comrades sunk in slumber at night. came
THE BRAHMAN'S SERVICE
with Matanga to another forest. Then in the morning, when the prince's companions found no trace of him, in deep depression they searched minutely through the neighboring jungle. Failing, yet determined to find him. they planned bold, distant expeditions, agreed on a rendezvous. and scattered.
Meanwhile Matanga, serenely satisfied and safe in the matchless manhood of the prince, fearlessly en- .tered the cave, which he discovered through the secret sign of Shive's giving. Seizing the copper plate, he pursued that path to the world below, stopping near a
swan-dotted pool in a pleasure grove beside a splendid city. Here he offered in sacrifice an assortment of ma- terials prescribed by Shiva, while Rajavahana gazed amazed and prevented intervention. When the flame leaped high from the fagots and sacred butter, he mut- tered a prayer and offered his body, the horne of past pieties, receiving in return a heavenly body that flashed like lightning.
Straightway a girl. bejeweled with glittering strings of gems. the comeliest in the whole world's family of lovely ladies, accompanied by many modest maidens, glided forward with the grace of a swan and offered the brilliant Brahman a single flashing gem. And when he asked her name, she slowly lifted respectful hands and spoke with a bird-sang's wistful sweetness:
"Best of Brahmans, I am the dear daughter of the best of demons. My name is Kalindi. My father was this world's mighty monarch and overcame gods in
•
26	THE TEN PRINCES
battle, until Vishnu, impatient of his prowess, sent him a guest to the death-goo's city. Then, seeing me sunk in a sea of sorrow at his loss, a holy hermit took pity on me, saying: 'Maiden, when a man appears who seems a god, he shall become your lover and shall rule the whole world below.' When I heard his word, I waited long, longing for sight of you as the pensive
plover waits wistfully for thunder, the promise of rain. I see your arrival as the ripe fruit of my desire. Wieh- the permission of the ministers who support my state, I come to you, mounting the chariot of a heart whose driver, is ~ove. Embrace as bride the glory of this
world s kingdom, and let me share her wifehood." Thereupon Matanga, with Rajavahana's consent mar- ri.e~the ~aiden. Much pleased with the winnin~ of a divine bride, he appropriated the kingship of the worl~ below and felt complete complacence.
Since Rajavuhana desired to return to earth in order to rejoin the band of comrades whom he had
THE BRAHMAN'S SERVICE
were grouped about them. The man's heart seemed to blossom with supreme delight and his lotus-face to burst into flower as he leaped from the hammock with the cry: "It is my master. the gem of the lunar line, the pure treasure of glory. It is Rajavahana.	Oh, happiness! When I least hoped it, I fall at his feet. Today is a holiday for my eyes." Herewith he mani-
fested his excess of joy in the grace of though tless speed. and, as the prince stepped forward three or four paces, touched with his brow his master's lotus- feet, while from his chaplet laughing jasmine blos- soms dropped.
The prince's eyes filled with tears of joy as he em- braced the throbbing form. "My good. my excellent Somadatta!" he cried. Then, seated in the cool shade of a dilly tree, he asked with fond familiarity: "My friend, in what region. in what manner have you
lived? What is your present goal? Who is this lady? How have you come by these companions? Pray tell me." And Somadatta, his fierce fever of anxiety al- layed by the fortuitous meeting with his friend. folded his lotus-hands and modestly related the nature of his
adventure.
eluded in making thi	diti	h '	IS expe I non,
e accepted a token
of M~tanga's gratitude for friendly services in a gem
thegiftofKalid' h	" ' m 1, t at counteracted hunger thirst
and.other tribularionsj bade Matanga farew;lI afte; a b.r:efescort; and retraced the path through the cave.
Failing	to	fi	d	h i . n	IS comrades there, he roamed the
e~rth. In his wandering he entered a park in a spa- CIOUS suburb He hi"
htsi	.	re e was p anmng to rest, when he caug tsightofamanwh h d
" h	.	0 a entered the garden and
sat WIt	a lady In aha	k	hi mmoc , w lie pleasant friends
$
CHAPTER III SOMADATIA'S ADVENTURE
"Your Majesty, while wandering with the aspira- tion of doing you some humble service, I was tortured by thirst in a forest region, so drank cool water from a vine-bordered stream, beside which I found a splen- did gem. This I secured and continued my journey until the excessive heat of heaven's gem made advance
impossible. Upon entering a temple found even in this jungle, I discovered an aged, discouraged Brah- man with many sons and made compassionate in- quiries. The Brahman answered, his face pale with privation, but reflecting the great hope that filled his mind: 'Oh, sir, I save these motherless sons by every pitiful shift. For the moment I give them what alms
I can collect in this wild wilderness, living here in
Shiva's shrine.' "<Brahman,' I asked, 'from what country comes
the king who camps near by? What is his name and the occasion of his coming?' 'My good sir,' answered the Brahman, 'Mattakala, king of the Latas, heard untold tales of the matchless beauty of Vamalochana, a pearl of a girl, daughter of Viraketu, lord of this land, and besieged his capital after he had spurned the demand for his daughter. Then Viraketu flinched and
surrendered his daughter, a mighty bribe. The lord
"
3°
TIlE TEN PRINCES
SOMADATTA'S ADVENTURE	3'
the doings of the king of Lata (already known to me from the Brahman's	narrative).	then continued:	'Wor- thy sir, we are servants of Manapala, Viraketu's ~in- ister. At his command we made our way by night through an underground passage into th: dw.elling of
the king of Lata, with the object of ~ssassl~atlon. Not finding the king. we consoled our dlsappomt~ent	by abstracting a great treasure; then plunge~ l~to th: jungle. Next day great numbers of the king s n:e tracked us down, surrounded and caught us with
of Lata, delighted at winning the maiden, started home, resolved to hold the wedding only in his own city, and camps at present in this forest for a hunting holiday. But Manapala, Viraketu's imperious minis-
ter, incited by the priceless maiden and indignant at his lord's humiliation, has interposed the camp of an army counting all four service branches.'
"At this point pity so filled my spirit that I gave my gem to the poor Brahman, reflecting that he had a large family of boys, was scholarly, penniless, old, a fit object of charity. His countenance blossomed with boundless bliss, and he departed with redundant ben-
edictions. Thereupon, being weary, I fell into a pleas- ant slumber.
"Presently, conducted by a number of swordsmen, the Brahman returned, both arms bound behind him, and the marks of whips upon his limbs. 'There is your thief,' he said, pointing at me. The king's hirelings loosed the Brahman, refused to hear my tale of the ac- quisition of the gem, seized me roughly (though they could not frighten me), dragged me by cords to a dun-
geon where they indicated certain men in fetters with
the words: 'There are your friends,' and fettered both
my feet. In bewilderment and hopeless tribulation I
turned and said: 'Well, my rough and ready men, (or
what cause do you endure the dolor of a dreary dun-
geon? They called you my comrades. What does it mean?'
"Perceiving my plight, those manly thieves related
the treasure, brought us fast-bound to c~mp. But missing a single priceless gem at the finall~ventory, they fettered us as you see, to kill us if we failed to re- store the ruby.'
"Now when I learned of the gem and the spot where it was found, I concluded that my find must be this very ruby; so touched on the ~rahm~n's wretched poverty that had prompted my gift, and Imparted my name , birth , and the circumstances of my search "for you sir thus forming friendship with conversation
nat~ral 'to our situation. Then at midnight I burst their bonds and mine, seized with their aid all the
"	"1	d"	ed the charg- weapons of our sleeping sennne s, Ispers
ing watch with some smart display of valor, and es- caped to Manapala's camp. And Manapala treated me with honor when he heard from his own servants the tale of my origin, my self-esteem, and my recent
prowess.	I "Next day certain envoys came from Mattaka a,
THE TEN PRJ CES
SOMADATTA'S ADVENTURE
33
delivering this rancorous message to Manapala: selor, sturdy thieves abstracted great treasure by means of an underground passage into my royal resi- dence. They took refuge in your camp. Surrender them. You will rue a refusal.' At this the counselor's eyes grew red with wrath, and he snubbed them thus: 'vyho is. the king of Lata? What meaning has his friendship? What profit in further service of the b.ooby?' The men reported Manapala's fustian verba- tim to Mattakala, who, enraged and also proud of his per,sanal prowess, advanced to fight with a small force, while haughty Manapala, having previously resolved
upon learning all details of the adventure from a mes- senger despatched by Manapala, came with great gratification to meet us. Expressing surprise at my courage) with the consent of counselors and kinsmen he celebrated no small festival, giving me his own daughter on a lucky day and anointing me crown pnnce.
'Coun-
on battle, equipped his men and advanced with eager fearlessness.
'.'1 too prepared for battle with the serviceable equl~men~ courteously provided by the counselor-a chariot with several horses and a skilful driver' a stout, well,-fitting coat of mail; a bow; a double quiver ~tocked wt~h various kinds of arrows-and,	confident in my contingent, followed the counselor intent on de-
"Since then, I spend my days anticipating the wishes of the king and enjoying manifold delights with Vamalochana (whom you see here), yet subject to fits of depression when, as often, your absence stabs my heart with pain. Hence, taking competent advice, I have come today with my wife to a spot sacred to re- union with friends, hoping to win the favor of that su- preme Shiva whose home is Mahakala. And Shive shows mercy to the faithful. Through his grace I see
your lotus-feet and attain the pinnacle of joy." Having listened to the tale and complimented his friend on his courage, Rajavahana,	censuring fate for the unmerited trial, recounted the detail of his own adventure. At its conclusion he perceived before him Pushpodbhava, so eagerly bowing that his brow
touched his toes. With a warm embrace, his bright eyes dimmed with tears of joy, the prince indicated him with the words: "See, my good Somndatta! Here is Pushpodbhava."	The two friends, dismissing the sorrow of long separation) found delight in an embrace.
Then the prince, seated once more in the shade of the tree, said with a courteous smile: "Comrade, I
stro~ing his foe. Avoiding the tangled struggle of the hostile hosts, wantonly delighting in my strength of arm, I shot a shower of shafts and struck down my foes. Then guiding mv solendi d h "
,	y sp en I c ariot-borses to- ward the enemy kin I iftl	""
.	g,	SWl	Y overtook	his chariot
andcutoffhishe d Wh h ..	.	a.	en ewasdownandhissur-
Vlvlngsoldlersscatt	d h f 1	ere) t ecounselor,supremely joy-
bee made sure of assorted horses, elephants	and other
ooty and'd	"	' ,	pat me peculiar honor. The king also,
34
THE TEN PRINCES
had a Brahman's business to perform, and being sure that my friends would interpose an obstacle if they knew the facts, I departed, leaving you all asleep. Tell me the decision of my friends on waking.	Where did they go in search of me? And what has been your personal journey?" The other swept his brow with dutiful hands and told his deferential tale.
CHAPTER IV PUSHPODBHAVA'S ADVENTURE
"Your Majesty, your friends did indeed infer that you had gone to serve a Brahman; yet being unable to determine the direction taken, we scattered and went our several ways to search for Your Majesty.
"For my part, I roamed the earth in search of Your Majesty until a day when I found the ray of the midday sun unendurable, so that I seated myself for a moment in the cool shade of a tree beneath a cliff. Glancing up, I beheld before me the shadow of a man, but shaped like a turtle with all his limbs drawn in at noon. 1 felt pity for any man falling with such precip- itancy from the sky, so I caught him in mid-air and eased his fall to earth. He had lost consciousness in
the dreadful drop; and when J revived him with cool restoratives, the tears of limitless misery streamed from his eyes as I asked why he fell from the precipice.
"He wiped the teardrops away with his finger tips and said: 'Kind sir, I am Rntnodbhava, son of Pad- modbhava, counselor of the lord of Magadha. On a trading trip 1 came to Kalnyavnna, a land beyond the sea, where J married a merchant's daughter. While 1 was returning with her, our ship was shattered at sea within sight of land; and all were drowned, save that I, through fate's partiality, came somehow safe to
35
WE TEN PRJ CES
shore. Yet having lost my dear wife. I struggle still in a sea of misery and see no shore of that sorrow, though, from reverence for a certain holy hermit's counsel, I have dragged out sixteen dreary years. Hence I flung myself from the mountain.'
"At this moment a woman's moan was heard and the words: 'A prophet has promised reunion with your husband and your son. It is sinful (0 weary of waiting and to cast yourself into the fire.' When I heard this, it flashed through my mind that the man was my
father. and I said: 'Father, I have much to communi- cate to you. However, it must all wait. In this emer- gency, I cannot disregard the woman's moan. Pray stay here a mere moment.'
"I hurried away and soon found myself in the pres- ence of a woman who, with folded hands) was desper- ately plunging into a fire that writhed with horrid flames. I snatched her from the blaze, conducted her to my fat~er, and said to the moaning old woman who
accompanied her: 'Mother, whence come you two? Why do you suffer in this wild wood? Tell me.'
"'My son,' she sobbed) 'this is Suvritta daughter of a certain Kalagupta) a merchant in Kalayavana, a land beyond the sea. While she was traveling with her beloved husband, the ship sank at sea. With me) her nurse) she dung to a plank and came through
lucky fate to shore. Her hour was upon her and she bore her son in ~jungle.	And when-unhap~y	mel-- the baby was seized by a wild elephant) she wandered
PUSHPODBHAVA'S ADVENTURE	37
on with me. She trusted a prophet's prediction that she should meet her husband and her son after sixteen years) and spent that space of time in a pious hermit- age; then, unable to endure her shoreless sorrow) kin- dled a fire and was about to sacrifice herself.'
"On hearing this) I recognized my mother and grew stiff with deference.	Then I gave her my full his- tory and introduced to her my father whose face al- ready was aflower and his eyes wide with wonder at the nurse's tale. My parents recognized each other by certain tokens and thrilled with bliss. They anointed
their dutiful son with a stream of joyful tears) clasped me close. caressed my head) then seated themselves in the shade of a tree.
" 'How fares our gracious King Rajahansa?' asked my father) and I told him all-the	loss of the king- dom, your birth, sir) the accumulation of princely lads, your undertaking to conquer the quarters) your journey with Matanga, the reason for our search after you. Then I found them a home in the hermitage of a holy man.
"Thereafter,	still intent on searching for Your Maj- esty, but recollecting that money is the necessary condition of all success) I psocured a band of disciples, apt assistants in the occult science for the possession of which I am myself. sir. under obligation to you. With them I visited the archeological remains of cities in the heart of the Vindhya forest) and. by means of magic ointment) discovered jars filled with valuables
38
THE TEN PRINCES
PUSHPODBHAVA'S ADVENTURE 39
to the eyes. My self-possession was shaken by her loveliness, and I became the target of Love's flowery shafts. She too, with the eyes of a startled fawn, cast in my direction more than one sidelong glance that served as arrow for blossom-arrowed Love; and she trembled like a vine that sways to a gentle breeze. Her curious glances played upon my person, drawn, withdrawn in a drawn battle between love and shy-
ness, betraying her state of mind. While her sweet
hin ts revealed her feeling, I planned the means of
happy meeting. "One day Bandhupala went with me to a wooded
at the roots of such trees as betrayed the presence of various treasure. These I exhumed, after posting sen- tinels on every side, and made a pile of countless
coins. I next visited a merchant caravan that ' nrriv- "
tng opportunely, encamped in the neighborhood; pur- chased stout oxen and sacks; packed the sacks on the ox~n; and transported the treasure to camp, dissimu- lating the character of my merchandise.
"With the captain of the caravan a certain mer- chant's son named Chandrapala, I formed a friendship ~d entered Ujjain in his company. To this great Clty I also brought my parents. Then, with the guid-
ance and approbation of Chandrapala's father Ban-
park at the city's edge, in order to win news of you by divination. And while he listened to the speech of birds beside a certain tree, I wandered in a distant grove, indulging melancholy joys. There, beside a lovely lake, I beheld Balachandrika, wistful and wan, sale source to me of cherished wishes. I thrilled to the charm of her winsome glances, fascinating with trou-
dhu I'	' pa a, a man 10 whom all virtues kept house
I coo- struc~ed a secret chamber, after catching a glimpse of
the king of Malwa. "Now :vhen I prepared to search for you in wild
forest reglO~s, my admirable friend Bandhupala learned my Intent"	d"d'
h	Ion an sal : You cannot search t e whole boundless	h F	" "
bled love and bashful eagerness, but I saw that the gleaming smile of that blossom-face was sad with the havoc of ravaging passion. I must know the cause of this, so approached her courteously and said: 'Sweet maiden, why is your face a fading flower?'
r'	eartn.	orget your dejection; ive qUIetly: I.will tell you as Soon as 1 see a ha
omen that indicates the finding of	id r	pp~ M h'	a gUl e lot you.
y . eart re~lved.with the nectar of his counsel and 1 continued WIth him from day to d	'
and fear, she told her hesitating tale: 'Gentle friend, King Manasara of Malwa, yielding to the infirmities of age, anointed his son Darpasara lord of Ujjain. This prince) ambitious to rule all lands of earth encir-
"B	1	ay"	"She trusted me with her secret; forgetting shame
ut at ast I saw a p	1 f	" ch drik	h	ear 0 a girl named Bala-
tai:" ~er~h:nt~ sedemeldth.e guardian goddess of a cer-
s we 10l9 Her fi	.. with the fr h	.	gure was instinct
th	es grace of youth, her face charmed like e moon, and her person was grateful as moonlight
lEE TEN PRINCES
eled by the seven seas, departed to perform austerities on Kailasa peak, leaving as regents two cousins. Chandavarman and Daruvarman, men of headstrong character. Now while Chandavarman rules the whole realm without a rival, Daruvarman, transgressing the
command of uncle and elder brother, pursues with wicked purpose the wives and wealth of other men. And since one day perceiving that my heart gives it- self to you (whose beauty, sir, is like the love-god's).
he .makes light of the sin of violating a virgin, and strives to force my inclination. Hence my anxiety; hence my melancholy.'
"When I had learned her heartfelt, overflowing love. for me. and the obstacle to the success of my ~ongmgs,.1 comforted	my	weeping	beloved;	and	hav- mg excogitated a plan for killing Daruvarman	I said: 'Gentle maiden, I have devised a pleasant 'plan to
ki.ll your	black-hearted	lover.	Through	trustworthy friends you must spread among the citizens the re- ~rt that a holy saint has made the following predic-
non: "A certain Yaksha demigod dominates Bala- chan.drika as a succubus. If any bold fellow matri- montally eligible, and avid to enjoy her boundless beauty, shall vanquish the Yaksha in the love-cham-
ber, and sha~lissue forth unscathed after enjoying the hea,venly bliss of conversation with the fawn-eyed malden a.nd her ~ingle girl companion, he is destined
sh clasp 10 ,marnage that bosom lovely as a pair of s eldrake birds."
PUSHPODBHAVA'S ADVENTURE
" 'Now if Daruvarman, hearing continual gossip to this effect, is frightened and keeps quiet, so much the better. If however his depravity drives him still to seek union with you, then your friends must say to him: "Sir, since you are the counselor of King Darpa- sara, it would be undignified to attempt this deed of daring in our dwelling, Rather let the citizens witness
the flower-eyed maiden conducted to your palace. If there Your Highness shall have his sport with her, then he may marry her and fulfil his wishes." To this he will assent. You will then visit his palace, and I will go too, wearing the dress of a girl. In some private chamber I will kill him by brute force, using fists and knees and feet; then leave the house with you, com-
posedly posing as your girl companion.	This plan you must adopt without fear or shame and afterward re- veal our overwhelming love to your father, mother, and brothers, winning them by every argument to our marriage. They will surely give you to a youth like me, well-born, wealthy, and handsome. And when
you have told them the manner of Daruvarman's death, you must report what they say.'
"Her flower-face seemed ready to bloom as she re- plied: 'Dear friend, it is your task to kill cruel Daru- varman. When he is dead, your wishes will doubtless bear fruit. It shall be as you say. I will follow in- structions exactly.' With this she darted many a half-glance at me and very deliberately went to her
home.
TIlE TEN PRINCES
"1 next returned to Bandhupala and learned from his divination that I should be reunited with you, sir, only after the lapse of thirty days. I accompanied him to hi~home, whence he dismissed me to my own d~ellmg. Here I received a message from Balachan- drika that she was preparing to visit Daruvarman	ha v- in~ b~en.summoned to sport in the love_chamb~r by
this victim caught in the tangling toils of my device. Therefore I de,fdy affixed to the proper portions of my person the frippery appropriate to a pretty girl- gems, ankl~tsl girdle. bracelets, armbands, earrings, nec~laces, sll~s,and powder-made	myself feel natu- ral 10 a stunning frock, and with my darling called at
the	fellow's	door .	H e,	w h en	t h e	porter	announced	us, came forward ceremoniously, forbade all other attend- an,ts to leave the doorway. but conducted Balachan-
drika and me to ab	doi	M	hOI au otr.	eanw ilec since the Ya-
PUSHPODBHAVA'S ADVENTURE
"My turn had come. Red with wrath, I dashed him headlong from the couch and drubbed him dead with fists and knees and feet. Then. rearranging my jewelry disordered in the heat of the tussle, and
soothing my shuddering darling, I returned to the court of the palace and screamed aloud as if shaken by terror: 'Ob, oh! The hideous Yaksha that dominates Balachandrika is killing Daruvarman. Quick. quick! Look at him!' When the gathered crowd heard this,
tears streamed and shouts of mourning deafened the horizon. They rushed in, gossiping together: 'He knew a mighty Yaksha lived in Balachandrika. Yet Daruvarman, blind with passion, had to invite her. His own act killed the fellow. Why mourn for him?'
"1 n the midst of this hubbub my love's eyes danced with fright, but I was shrewd enough to hasten home with her. After some days I publicly married my moon-faced maiden in the manner prescribed by
holy men, and enjoyed to the full the exquisite de- lights of long-anticipated love. Today, being the day foretold by Bandhupala's	birds, I left the city, waiting without; and now my eyes enjoy, in seeing you, a sec-
ond blissful holiday." When Rajavahana had listened to his friend's
story, he recounted to him with unflagging gusto his own experiences and Somadatta's; then bade Soma- datta return as soon as he had worshiped Shiv a, lord
0
ks~~ ~tory had become the talk of the town. an in- quismve crowd of citizens gathered expectantly	round Daruvarman's door,
. "That creature. devoid of discernment and dcm-
mated by passi 'I d Id	sSI,on. e my lady to a gem-incrusted
go	en couch With sw	'd an	s- own cushions offering her
and me-for	the di	r h	'
.
quite concealed 01 old'	y sex-an assortment of luxuries
mciu mgornam	t	f	ld
tm 19 t and my bewitching dress
' ens0 go and gems gay stuffs of
fi wit camphor, fragrant fl.	F
nest texture y 11	d 1 .h	' e owsan a mixed with musk betel
0'
0'
0' ewers. 'or Just twenty see-
onds he stood there	h	. c attenng, and laughing as he
talked; then, blind with passion, showed a mind to fondle the sweet maiden's bosom.
43
44
THE TEN PRINCES
of Mahakala, and had conducted wife and friends to their camp. Thereafter, attended by Pushpodbheva, he entered the capital of Avanri, Ujjain, that heaven on earth. Once there, Pushpodbhava introduced him t~B~ndhupalaandotherfriendsashisprince,sonof his kmgly master, thus conciliating (or him abundant homage, but gave out the report abroad that he was
a~ eminent Brahman, proficient in all polite arts. In his own home he provided his prince with baths	food
CHAPTER V
TIlE MARRIAGE OF THE BELLE OF AVANTI
Then came the spring. In separated hearts the season fanned the flame of fondness with southern breezes (leading Love's marshaled army) that blew dilute as if subtilized by the snapping of serpents crowding tree-cavities on Malabar Mountain, that
traveled tranquilly as if balanced by their sandal's perfumed burden. It made the horizon's circle vocal with coo and hum of bees and cuckoos whose throats were thrilling to the flavor of the mango blossoms' honey. In minds of self-sufficing maids it caused fan- tasies to flower, and flowers to flare on mango, vitex,
red ashoka, dhak, and sesamum. It spurred the spirit of sensitive taste toward love's great festival.
In this entrancing season the belle of Avanti, Manasara's	daughter	A vantisundari,	with	her	favorite friend Balachandrika who loved a frolic in a lovely country garden, surrounded too by a bevy of the city's sweetest maidens, piled sand in the cool shade of a baby mango tree and there paid playful worship
to the love-god with a varied heap of fragrant offer-
ings, among them perfumes, blossoms, turmeric pow-
der, and strips of Chinese silk. Into this wooded garden. like Love with Spring,
-s
and other daily comforts.
J	,
- _.
A vantisundari,
THE TEN PRJ CES
THE BELLE OF AVANT!	47
flowering ornamental lotus bud; her three plicatures from the ordered rise of a palace stairway; her capil- lation from the lovely sheen of bees that, clinging, form Love's bowstring; her breasts from the beauty of two full golden bowls; her arms from the delicacy of vines in a bower; her neck from the symmetry of a conch of victory; her lip, like a bimba fruit, from the redness of mango flowers that maidens fondly wear above the ear; her sweet smile from the splendor of Love's Rower-arrows; her every word from the witch- ery of the soft song of Love's first messenger, the cuckoo; the breath of her sigh from the gentleness of
the southern breeze, leader of all Love's soldiers; her eyes from the pride of two fishes figured on a conquer- ing banner; her brows from the curve of a b9W; her face from the spotless enchantment of Love's first friend, the moon; her hair from the similitude of a pet peacock's fan. Then he bathed the image in sandal perfume, mingled with essence of honey and musk, and polished it with camphor dust.
Like the embodied goddess of beauty, the daugh- ter of Malwa's monarch gazed at one who seemed the love-god, incarnate, self-propitiate, self-revealed to grant her heart's desire; and such emotion filled her that she trembled like a vine swaying to soft breezes. Hence she relied on a demure deportment and turned aside, making shy trial of this demeanor now, and now of that.
With passionate wonder he gazed at her and mur-
came Rajavahana	attended	by Pushpodbhava	, for he
longed to behold the belle of Avanei, the image of the
goddess Charm. From time to time. from spot to
spot, he listened to polylogies of cuckoo companies
and parrot parties and swarms of bees amid mangoes
gay with crowding twig and Aower and fruit on
branch.es sway~ng to the southern breezes. He gazed
from time to tune at lakes winsome with clear ,cool
waters tunefully troubled by serried swans and cranes
and ducks and sheldrakes that gaily played where lo-
tus cl~sters-blue and bright and white-began to
open mtc flower. So. with unhesitating grace, he
drew near the lovely ladies. Then Balachandrika
waved a hand that said: "No shyness! Come!" And
su~moned thus, surpassing heaven's king in majesty, Rajavahana stood f	f	irh I	"
ace to ace WI	slender-waisted f ~he shone, a creation of Love. Yes, Love had
ashioned a paragon of women a .f h	ish d " istful	,SleWISe,1n
Wist u memory of Ch"	"" arm, to Image forth this dupli-
cateo He formed h	r	f	h .	er teet	rom t e SWeetness of two
autumr- lilies in his own pleasure pool' the languid grace of her gait f	h	'
d	rom t e COUIse of a wanton swan own a long lake in	I	d	d
a "	a ptante gar en; her calves from n qUlv;r s curve; her comely thighs from the shapeli-
ess a two plantain stems by the d	f h	h	COra asummer-
ino;s:~ ~r gen~rous hips from the sweep of conquer- G	a,Tlots; er navel (which seemed an eddy in
anges stream) from the semblance of an early-
THE TEN PR1NCES
rnured: "Surely, when God created his host of lovely women, she was a marvelous accident, as when (to quote the homely proverb) a worm traces a perfect letter while boring in a book. Else, why did he, pos- sessed of 'such creative skill, fashion no rival loveli- ness?" And she, unable for shame to face him, with- drew half-hidden among her friends, still gazing at Rajavahana from under arching eyebrows with side- long glances of eyes half-closed yet seeking his. His
beauty was the snare, and she the deer. He also felt his heart the target of bitter shafts
that sapped his strength with the sum of graces which she then revealed. Meantime she wondered: "No ri- val vies with him in charm. In what city does he make holiday for the eyes of blissful maidens? Among all matrons blest in husband and in son,what mother , through possession of this gem, becomes herself the central pearl of honor's diadem? Who is his goddess? What his errand here? Since I discovered that he mocks the love-gad's beauty, the jealous god tortures me cruelly, makes me a disembodied spirit like him.
self. What shall I do? How can I know him?" . Now Balachandrika, interpreting their secret feel- l~gS by research of their manners, felt that a full re- cital of the prince's story would not be etiquette be- fore a company of young ladies, so introduced him in
more general terms' "P .	hi .	f .	•	tincess, t IS IS a gentleman 0
lofty birth pr fici . II . , 0 cient III a gracious arts a dangerous
enemy, one who draws near to the divine. He is a
THE BELLE OF AVANT!
49
judge of gems and charms and balms. He merits at- tention and should receive your homage."
The princess, serenely greeting this echo of her own desire, gently ruffled by rapture as a wave by a zephyr, provided a decorous throne for the prince who transcended the love-god's deadly beauty. Then, by the skilful hand of her friend, she paid him homage with abundant, varied offerings, including perfumes, Rowers, rice, camphor, and betel leaves.
Meanwhile Rajavahana was thinking: "Surely, in a former life she was Yajnavati, my bride. No other- wise could such love for her rise in my heart. In the hour when the curse was fulfilled, the holy hermit did indeed grant us a common memory of that life; yet when occasion offers, I will awaken her remembrance by hinting the details." At this moment a beautiful swan moved gaily toward him. And seeing Balachan- drika, at the princess' eager instigation, prepared to catch it, he thought: "The time to speak has come." Thereupon Rajavahana,	an artist in narration, related this graceful tale:
"Dear friend, in days long past there was a king named Shamba. With his heart's dearest he thought to spend a happy hour beside a lotus pond. There in a cluster of red water lilies lay a swan that slept inert. He crept upon it, caught it, and bound its feet with a cord of lotus fiber. Then, gazing at his beloved's lov- ing coun tenance, while a slow smile bloomed upon his cheek, he said: 'My moon-faced bride, the swan is
5°
THE TEN PRJ CES
THE BELLE OF AVANTI
5'
bound and lies calm as a peaceful saint. Go with him where you will.' Then the swan pronounced a curse on Shamba: '0 King. I am a saint, vowed to lifelong pov- erty and chastity.	I lay in this lotus cluster, deep in devotion, sunk in bliss. when you brought shame upon me for no cause beyond your kingly pride. For this sin endure the torment of separation from your love.' And Shamba's face grew sad, for he could not suffer
separation from the mistress of his life. He fell stiffly t~ the ground and spoke imploringly: 'Master. for- give a deed inspired by ignorance.'	Then pity entered th: holy heart, and these words were spoken:	'0 Kmg, throughout your present life the curse shall be r:mitted. Yet my words may not be frustrate. In a life to be, when this flower-eyed lady's soul has entered another body, you shall love her with devotion. Then, because you have bound my feet for two moments,
for two months your feet shall be fettered, while you
endure th~ sadness of separation from your love. Yet
y!ou shall live long thereafter with your bride in king- Ih., ' appmess. He also granted both a memory con-
tl.numg from life to life. Therefore-you	must not bind a swan."
When the princess heard this tale she regained re-
peal of Yajnavati.	Thus in the world even discerning men do wrong for gallant reasons." In this fashion maiden and prince, by hints revealing each to each a common knowledge of life and names recalled from long ago, felt their hearts fill with a passion of love.
At this moment the queen of Malwa, with her reti- nue, approached the spot to witness her daughter's holiday. But Balachandrika, seeing her from afar and fearing disclosure of the secret, waved an agitated hand that sent Rajavahana with Pushpodbhava into the cover of a group of trees. Manasara's queen re- mained but a moment to enjoy her daughter's gay and graceful play with her friends; then wished to conduct the princess to the palace.
As the belle of Avanti followed her mother, she spoke these words, ambiguous between swan and prince: "0 splendid royal creature, you came to me in the garden to share my holiday, and I send you away untimely. I follow my mother, for such.is my duty. Love me no less for this." She added courteous nothings, but more than once her wistful eyes turned back to seek his face, as she moved toward the palace.
There, introducing the subject of her longing, she learned from Balachandrika his name and lineage, while Love's bewildering arrows pierced her heart. In the anguish of separation she faded daily like the cres- cent of the waning moon. Food and all occupation grew distasteful; in a quiet chamber her slender body tossed on a couch of flower clusters and single blos-
membrance of h .	er own rormer Ire. Her memory
C
whispered that this was indeed her soul's delight· and
the stem of dey ti	C	h	' . .	a Ion put tort	blossoms as she said
" ear SIT, 10 days long past
WIth a tender smile: "D
Sh b	I e. am athus bound th
. d e swan In	eference to the ap-
I','
THE TEN PRJ CES
so~s sprinkled with sandal perfume. Her girl friends, grieved to see their dainty princess SO tortured by the Aa~eoflove, devised and used many refrigerant rem- edies-water for sprinkling gathered in golden bowls with infusions of sandal, cuscus, and camphor; gar~ merits madeof softest fibers; lotus-leaf fans. Yet this cooling service of her person, like water in boiling oil, turned to universal heat.
On Balachandrika, distressed and at her wits' end
the maiden turned a tear-dimmed, peeping glance
f:om half-closed eyes, and with lips parched by hot
SIghs of absent love, she slowly sobbed: "They say,
my dear, Love has five arrows, made of flowers. It is
not true. He strikes me with countless shafts and
they are iron. My dear, I find the moon more 'fierce
th~n the fire beneath the sea. For though the ocean
dries when entered by the fire, it swells again at the
mo.ment when the fire departs. But how can I de-
THE BELLE OF AVANT!	53
Now Balachandrika perceived that the delicate princess was reduced to the last extremity of love's fever, with no salvation other than the handsome Rajavahana to whom her heart was subject; and she thought:	HI must bring the prince at once. If not, Love will lead her down the path of memory. Well, when prince and princess met in the garden, the archer-god shot simultaneous shafts. Therefore. it should be easy to bring the prince." She then left the belle of Avanti in the care of friends deft in necessary service. and visited the prince's dwelling.
She found Rajavahana	(whose heart seemed a quiv- er to hold the flower-arrows of the' archer) reclining on a couch strewn with blossoms that withered at the touch of his fevered limbs, and conversing with Push- podbhava concerning the mistress of his life. When he saw that mistress' favored friend draw near, he thrilled with joy to find before him in Balachandrika	the very simple that he sought. And when her gracefully joined hands were lifted, seeming a lovely lotus bud against the background of her brow, he offered her a decorous seat, received a gracious gift of betel leaves and camphor from Avantisundari, and begged for tidings of his love.
This was the flattering reply: "Your Majesty, since seeing you in the garden) she is racked by love and finds no peace on beds of flowers. She seeks the unattainable,	as a dwarf the fruit on a lofty tree: love- blinded, she seeks the bliss of resting on your bosom. Unurged, she has written a letter and bade me deliver
SCribethe cruelty of the ruthless moon who kills the
lotus home and bl th I	f hi	~ Th '	rr pace 0	IS own sister, Beauty?
b e Southern breeze blows thin, scorched doubtless ycontact ,,:,ith a heart that shrivels in the flame of
b!
a sence. This couch f	1
a	new_p ucked	blossoms	burns body, as if tufted with flames of desire. Even
ffi t ISsandal sears r b " "
h	my im s, as If thick with clotted Venom from the d'	.	f ro d i	h rlppmg angs of serpents that coiled
un Its mot er-tree G' heal The n-i	.	IVeover your toil to cool and
god: is th: ~:~ce wh?s.e beauty be~ts the deadly love-
him I	Yphysician for the Sickness of love. And cannot WIn.	What shall I do?"
THE TEN PRlNCES it to her beloved," The prince took the letter and
Your body, like a tender Bower, Shows matchless love.compelling power; Dear friend, you must not let me find A hardened heart, to love unkind.
When he had read, he said with reverence: "Dear
friend, you are at once the beloved bride of Pushpod-
bhava, ~ho follows me like a shadow, and, so to speak,
t~e projected life of that fawn-eyed maiden. Your
WI:watered the vine of this enterprise.	I will do any-
thing. The fawn-eyed lady accuses me of carrying a
har~ heart. When she met my gaze in the garden. she
straIghtway stole my heart and took it home with her.
Let her judge whether it be soft or hard. It is no light
matter to enter a maid's chamber. Yet in one day or
twoat tI'11 . . ~os J Wl contrive a proper method to be
~01ted with her. Give her this word from me, and let l~?e your care that no harm befall one delicate as a
sinsflower" AndB1h drik . f	.. .	.	aac an n a,JOyulat receiving
his lov.e-laden message, departed for the palace. Rajavahana also withdrew with Pushpodbhava,
toconsolethew	f b	. h	.	oea asencemthegardenwherehe
THE BELLE OF AVANTI	55
the remnant of the meal untasted by his sweet-smiling lady; the blossom couch within the bower of jasmine vines. Ever recalling beginnings half-completed when he met the perfect princess, ever beholding with alarm-s-for they seemed the tufted flame-points of passion-s-the young mango twigs that trembled in the gentle breeze. ever hearing the coo and cry and hum of love's whisperers, cuckoo. parrot, and bee, he
moved from spot to spot, for emotion forbade repose. At this juncture a Brahman chanced to appear. at-
tended by a fellow with shaven pate. The Brahman charmed by his taste in costume. for his robe was gay and finely woven. while showy gems hung sparkling from his ears. Observing that Rajavahana	was source and center of a circle of majesty. he pronounced a ben- ediction. And when the prince courteously inquired: "Who, sir, are you? In what branch of scholarship are you eminent?" he announced: "I am Vidye- shvara, the scientist. My special field is legerdemain.
I travel widely, providing diversion for princes, and have today reached Ujjain in my rounds." Then, re- garding Rajavahana	more narrowly. he laughed and asked with meaning: "Why so pale in this pleasure- garden?"
To this question Pushpodbhavn felt it incumbent on himself to give respectful answer: "Surely. sir, your first words came to us from lips friendly to good- ness. Your chaste benediction made you at once a dear friend of ours. And what secret is kept from
54 read:
ad experienced	the blissful vision of his soul's chosen. There he found the	f	.
. ld	grove 0 trees whose twigs had
yre ed flower clusters to the maid	. h	ld eye'	th	h	at	Wit	partri
ge , er ace entrancing as the
s, e spot were she h f	. autumn moon had ffi d	.
th	1	'	a ere worship to the love-god; e coo bank of sand that preserved her footprints;
~.._---
L
-
THE TEN PRJNCES
friends? When the princess of Malwa came to this garden to celebrate the spring festival and chanced to meet this prince, a passion came to birth, mutual and overwhelming. His present melancholy results from the lack of means to bring about a firm and happy union."
Then Vidyeshvara, remarking the sweet embar- rassment of the prince's countenance, said with a quizzical smile: "Your Majesty, what ambition of yours is unattainable while] am at your service? I will perplex the mind of the monarch of Malwa by
s~ien~ificjugglery, will celebrate his daughter's wed- ding In the very presence of the populace, and will in- troduce you into her chamber. This proposal should be conveyed beforehand to the princess through the agency of her friend." And the prince, delighted to find unselfish friendship, witnessed a display of Vidye-
shvara~s dexterity	in jugglery,	tested	his judgment	of deception, of pretended affection, of genuine devotion, and parted with high esteem.
So Rajavahana, deeming his desire as good as granted through Vidyeshvara's scientific skill re- turned wi.th Pushpodbhava	to his dwelling, when~e he sent to hIS darling, by the mouth of Balachandrika, an account of the plan for their union undertaken by
['
THE BELLE OF AVANT!	57
numerous attendants equally correct, came to the palace entrance, briskly presenting his credentials to the doorkeepers, who obsequiously informed the king of the arrival of a conjurer. The king of Malwa, him- self desirous of witnessing the spectacle, spurred furthermore by curious ladies, summoned the scien-
tist into a special chamber, where he pronounced a formal benediction and was bidden to begin. Then amid the blare of the banging band, while warbling women cooed like mating cuckoos, while waving pea- cock feather-dusters fascinated the spectators' spirits to a pitch of passion, while the whirl of attendants	gy- rated about him, he stood for a moment with squint-
ing eyes. Straightway hooded serpents, with violent venting of vehement venom, dazzling the palace with the jewels on their crests, crawled horribly forth. But numerous vultures seized the monstrous snakes in their beaks, and paraded the sky. Next, the Brah- man astonished the king with a spectacle of Man-lion
tearing the devil chieftain Hiranyakashipu,	then said: "Your Majesty, as our concluding number it is proper that you witness a scene of happy omen. We are therefore to present a wedding, initiating a long life of felicity, between a maiden personating your daugh- ter and a prince marked with all marks of royalty."
Receiving the permission of the expectant mon- arch, his face blossoming at the quaint conception of success in such a stratagem, he smeared his eyes with a most mystifying lotion and peered about him. And
fight the night. Whe~ morning dawned, the scientist Vidyeshvara,
correct In taste st I d
bv i	.	he tri d y impatience	e trte	to
the Brahman'	then	t l	,orn
' , yre, eportment, and gait, with
L
THE TEN PRJ CES
while all the spellbound spectators cried: "This is magic!" at the appearance of Rajavahana, his heart aflower with bliss, and of Avanrisundari,	forewarned and richly decked with splendid gems, the prestidigi- tator showed his perfect familiarity with every text of the marriage service by uniting them before the sacred fire.
At the conclusion of the ceremony, the Brahman cried aloud: "All creatures of magic, begone!" and all the phantom forms obediently vanished. Rajavahana also, previously instructed in the mechanics of disap- pearance, floated like a specter into the maidens' apartments.	The king of Malwa, for his part, con- sidering this a superior exhibition, gave the Brahman
scientist a munificent fee, dismissed him, and with- drew to the inner palace.
Meanwhile. the belle of Avanti with her best friends as bridesmaids. conducted her husband to a splendid chamber. Thus Rajavahana, tasting fruition of his wis?es	through	powers	human	and	superhuman. system~tlcally conquered the shyness of his fawn- eyed b.t1deby tastefully tender attentions, taught her the bliss of abandon, awakened an intimate confi- ~ence. Finally) eager for the heavenly delight of hear- mg a beloved woman repeat his own words, he related
t~e.complicated and exciting history of the fourteen divisions of the universe.
CHAPTER VI
RAJAVAHANA'S ADVENTURE
When the perfect princess had listened to ,the out- line of cosmic history, her eyes blossomed with won- der' and she said with a smile: "Beloved) through you'r kindness I know today why ears are .mine: To- day you have given me the lamp of education, ~ISpel- ling the darkness in my mind. Ripened now IS the
fruit of the devotion paid your lotus-feet. What s~rv- ice may I do you. to balance the fav~r of yo~r kind- ness? For I have nothing of my own. since all is yours. And yet, poor as I am) I retain one d~minion. For without my will.you cannot taste my k~ss)poor fa~e perhaps for one who has touched the lips of Eru~-
tion; or clasp me to your bosom. -where Beauty s
breasts have lain." With this she rested her generous breast on her
1
I
lover's bosom like a cloud upon the sky. while her eye) sparkling with awakened passion, was brigh~ as a fuIl- blown plantain flower' while her mass of hair mocked the peacock's splendid fan (being dotted with ~los- soms that drew the flashing bees); and shyly kissed her lover's lip. a red flower bud to her, a~d ~ gem dart- ing red rays of light. Released by paSSl?n s first sur- render the charming chain of joy uncoiled yet more
its ga;,surprising links. When love grew faint, they 59
60
RAJAVAHANA'S ADVENTURE
of something superhuman!	A bogus robe of virtue out- side, and rottenness inside! A mountebank! A quack! Aha! And here she is, his mistress-curse	hed-the belle of Avanti, who disdains men like lions, even men like me! This very day she shall see how her husband
adorns an impaling-stake! The drab who dirties her
family!" Distorting his brow in a horrible frown, he seemed
the death-god with stiff arm rough as a bar of black iron when he seized the prince's hand (fair as a lily and marked with the royal marks oflotus and wheel) and tugged with brute force. The prince, a natural hero eminent in all manly virtues, felt patient endurance to be the sale specific for a calamity sent by fate, so cried: "Remember, 0 graceful as a swan, the swan's story. Endure, my soul, two months." With this
consolation to her who, being his life, longed to leave life behind, he passed into the power of his enemy. Then the queen and king of Malwa learned the
facts with pain; yet, made indulgent by their son- in-law's beauty, they saved him from death, though his enemy hinted the alternative of suicide. But since they had abdicated, they could not rescue him from misfortune. For vindictive Chandavarman des- patched a full report to Darpasara, performing auster- ities on Kailasa peak; seized Pushpodbhava's whole fortune and imprisoned his entire household without
trial; and kept Rajavahana	confined, like a lordly lion cub, in a wooden cage. Such torments as hunger and
THE TEN PR1NCES
slept; and to both came a dream in which they saw an aged swan whose feet were bound with lotus stems. They woke together. Then the prince found his feet c~nc~aled by silver fetters, caught, as it seemed, in a binding chain of moonbeams that had strayed among lilies.
The ?rinc~s perceived it, bewildered by wonder and terrible fright, and loosed her throat in a scream. Thereupon the whole houseful of maidens as if en- :veloped.~Y flames, as if harried by goblins: shudder- Ing, oblivious of the relation between present act and future consequence, forgetting their engagement to ke~p ,the secret, bruising their limbs on the floor, splitting their throats with shrieks veiling their cheeks in rivers of tears, went crazy. At this moment of muddle the chamberlains, who had unhindered en-
tranc~, bustled in, crying: "What now? What now?" and discovered th	[i h	f he nri	.
. .	epIgtotteprince. HISpersonal dlg~lty cU:bed their handcuffing zeal, but they made an Imme~late report to Chandavarman.
Flaming with fury h	d	.	. f . h'	' e entere . He listened with
re in IS eye' and h . id . ,	avmg I entified the pair he
sneered. "Ah 1 H	h'	' bh th a. ere e IS, the friend of Pushpod-
ava, t at foreign so	f	h d .	n0 amere ant, that money-
rna png, that husband of Balachandrika who caused
my younger brother's death-d	h	I H	he i the hands	amn	er r	ere	e IS,
orne coxcomb	th	.. les the sill	£'	e arrogant artist, who tick-
gling trickYto:n~ O~kwith his skill in a pack of jug- s, an	00 s them by shamming the dignity
l
61
62	THE TE PRJ CES	r
thirst were indeed averted by the power of the magi- cal gem which lay concealed in his thick-growing hair; b~t Chandavarman, trusting none but himself, had him transported on an expedition to destroy the king of the Angas, who had refused a request for his daughter's hand.
~ith an army of terrifying size, Chandavarman besieged Champa) the Anga capital, whose king, Si~. havar~an, was indomitable as a lion. Too impatient
to await the near arrival of kings summoned by his n~mer~us envoys and hastening by forced marches to hl~ relief, he breached the wall; issued forth with a	l mighty force; and, like Disdain clad in living Resh and
RAJAVAHANA'S ADVENTURE
can there be for one caugh t violating the virgins' apartments?	The king is old. Senility strips his mind of pride and scorn. He takes his naughty daughter's part. But why should you humor any whim of his? Do not delay to give my ears a holiday by sending word that the lovesick swain has been executed with
fancy tortures. And the naughty girl, with her
younger brother Kirtisara, should have her feet tied
and be kept in jail." Hereupon he glared at his attendants and issued
orders: "At dawn bring that vulgar violator of vir- gins' chambers to the palace door. And tether along- side the big elephant Hot-baby with all his trappings on. As soon as I am married, I will give that villain with my own hand as a plaything to the elephant. Then I will climb Hot-baby's	back and go to capture
that crowd of kings who are coming to help my ene- my, with their treasure and their animals."
So, at the first blush of the following dawn, the prince was brought by guardsmen into the royal courtyard. Near him stood Hot-baby, with dripping cheeks. At that moment the prince felt his feet freed
from the silver fetter, which, transformed into a heav- enly nymph winsome as the crescent moon, walked about him with respectfully lifted hands and said with deference: "Your Majesty, lend me your gracious at-
tention. I am a nymph named Suratamanjari, child of Somarashmi.	One day, when my gaze was riveted on a silly swan snapping at a lotus in the sky, my
b~oodJassailed the hostile host. In that great struggle
Simhavarman's	e t'	1 n ire army me ted away- he was bat-
tceredby a hundred bitter blows and was 'captured by
handavarman	who 1	d wi h	h	.. ,eape	Wit super uman agiliry
from elephant to el h	Y hi . .	ep ant.	et IS life was spared by
theVIctor who fe I'	.. ,	,	e 109an overmastering	desire for the
dalugkhter Ambalika-reputed	a pearl of a girl- puc edallthedart f	hi
.	.	s rom IS person, but kept a pre-
V10US promise by th	.	h'	. rustlng un IOta prison. There-
upon, hosts of astrolo	.' gers concurred In computing
that the p .	h 1 h	~mcess s au d be married that very day
I
w en mOfll1ngdawned.	'
While Chandavarm	ki .	.	an was rna 109 festive prepa-
rations, a courier narn d Enai K 'J	e najangha returned from
ai asa peak	.	hi , reportmg t IS response f	hi'
pot	.	rom t e pem-
entlary Darpasara: "F It Wh	. 00 .	at possible mercy
I
•. a'
•
EM
TIlE TEN PRINCES
pearl necklace parted in my effort to stop him and chanced to drop where the great sage Markandeya was dipping in and out a shallow Himalayan pool. It fell on his head, doubling the silver luster with the flash of gems. But he was enraged and let fall a curse upon me: 'Wretched female, turn to inanimate metal.' Yet he relented, decreeing that this sorrow should
pass after I had served two months as a chain for your lotus-feet, and granting me full powers of perception.
"When for this serious offense I had become a sil- ver chain, a fairy named Virashekhara,	son of Mana- s,avega and grandson of Vegavar, a king of Ikshvaku's line, came to Kailasa peak and possessed himself of
me. Thereafter, being at enmity with the fairy em- peror Na~avahanadatta, scion of King Vatsa's line, who continued a hostility begun by his father, he sought a competent ally and came to an understand- i~g with austere Darpasara, who promised him his
Sister, the belle of Avanti.
"One nigh,t .when moonlight purified the sky, flesh conque,red spmt; and he, longing to behold Avanti- sundari, dear goal of his desire, visited the women's c~ambers t,hat ,gleamed like the palace of heaven's king. Safe In his magic power of invisibility	he dis-
RAJAVAHANA'S ADVENTURE
personal dignity in his deep desire to lay hands upon you, he used what power fate gave him while you and she lay sleeping in the u tter bliss of mutual embraces: he fettered your lotus-feet with me, a silver chain, and departed, ramping with rage. Today my curse is ful- filled, and your bimensual subjection,	Grant me your gracious pardon. What may I do for you?" She fell at his feet and was dismissed with the direction:	"Com-
fort with this story her who is my life." The very next moment shouts arose: "Murdered!
Chandavarman is murdered! His sturdy arm was just extended, fervent for the hand of Simhavarman's daughter Ambalika, when a cursed thief pounced on him, drubbed him, and stuck a knife in him. Then the villain spread a mat of a hundred corpses on the pal- ace floor, and stalks about unabashed." On hearing
this, the prince tossed the mahout aside, mounted the must elephant, and made for the palace at top speed, while the great beast's impetus ploughed a path through the infantry. Into the palace he burst, shout- ing with a voice deep as many thunders:	"Who is the hero who has done this great deed, hardly possible for
a mere man? Let him come forth, and mount this
must elephant with me. He is safe at my side, though
gods and devils pursue him." Hearing this, the man came forth with intense de-
light, advanced saluting, and briskly mounted the
back of the elephant, which crumpled at command.
covered her at the moment when her head rested on your bosom sleep,'n ' love'	'
.	'	g In ove s sweet faintness her passion's flood dik db'
.	e	y your nectar-tales, your con-
caten~ted history of creation, continuance and de-
structlon of the	If'	'	Even as he climbed, the prince recognized him; and
cosmos.	n unate, yet curbed by your
)
66	THE TEN PRINCES
his eyes blossomed with joy as he cried: "Ah! My dear, my very dear Apaharavarman!"	Then, as his friend sat behind, he caught two sturdy arms thrust b~neath his own armpits, thus seeming to embrace himself; after which, he reached behind him and cl~sped his friend. But Apaharavarman broke the f~lendly bond at once in order to hu.rl to the ground plcke~ men of diverse enemy service branches, proud of their pluck, who surged about, using bow, discus, lance, barb, dart, spear, club, mace, and other assorted
weapons. A moment later he saw that army sur- rounded by another host that doubled in from every side.
Pre~ently a gentleman-blond	as a wingseed blos- som, With .h.airlike a black gem, with hands and feet as	fine. as	hl~es, with	long	eyes	brilliant	black	and	mil- ky white, With a jeweled dagger at his hip, with silken robe, slender and broad in waist and chest-showered
dex~erous shafts on the hostile host while sternly sconng with his toes the roots of the ears of his fleet
approaching elephant. This man inferring from pre~
vious desc-i	' hi us escnpnon that Prince Rajavahana was before
im, bowed ceremoniously, then fixed his glance on
RAJAVAHANA'S ADVENTURE
man, "pray grant this faithful servant the favor of a glance. You are to consider his get-up a disguise and his name Dhanamitra	an incognito, If you have no objection, let him free the Anga king from confine- ment and assemble the dissipated treasure and ani- mals, while Your Majesty seeks a retired and pleasant
resting-place. Then let him wait upon you with yon- der kings friendly to us." "As you will," replied the prince, and, following the indicated path from the city, he dismounted from the elephant beneath a tre- mendous banyan tree in silky sand cooled by puffs of wind from Ganges' billows, Apaharavarman tOO,
having already dismounted, quickly smoothed with his own hand a space of Ganges sand broad as an elephant's back and seated himself comfortably.
As the prince sat thus, Dhanamitra hastened to him with low obeisance, and with Dhanamitra came Upaharavarman,	Arthapala,	Pramati,	Mitragupta, Mantragupta, and Vishruta; also King Praharavar- man of Videha, Kamapala, lord of Benares, and Sim- havarman, sovereign of the Angas. Penetrated with joy, the prince arose, crying: "Is it possible? The
whole company of my friends! What a festive occa- sian!" And when they had greeted him with due cere- mony, he embraced them with passionate fondness. He also looked with a filial eye upon the three kings -of Benares, Videba, and Anga-presented by his friends, and thrilled with delight when they fervently
embraced him) their grey hair waving with joy.
Apaharavarman and reported "F II t	'	:	'0 owmg your ill-
s ructions as to r	t	hi	h au e, t IS gat ered group of kings has
come to the relief of th	A arm '	e nga sovereign. The enemy
0
y IS crushed and dispersed W I	.	omenan
cou.~ take th~ir weapons, What next?"
Your MaJesty" ,
d hild c I ren
dh
0 cne	t	e delighted	Apaharavar-
0
00
)
68
THE TEN PRJ CES
Then, after the interchanges of affection, at the ur- gent desire of all his dear comrades, he recounted his own adventures with those of Somadatta and Push- podbhava, thereby clearing the ground for an ordered narrative of his friends' experiences. First among
them was Apaharavarman, who related the following history.
CHAPTER VII APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE
"Your Majesty, on the day when you plunged into Devils' Hole in order to serve a Brahman, and all your friends set out in search of YOll, I too roamed the earth. Now I learned from a certain group of gossi- pers that in the Anga country, on the bank of the Ganges outside the capital Champa, there lived a great sage named Marichi in whom potent austerities had begotten divine insight; and I traveled to that re- gion, desirous of learning from him your whereabouts. In his hermitage I discovered under a baby mango a
hermit pale with depression of spirit, from whom I re- ceived the attentions due a guest. Then after a mo- ment's rest, I said: 'Where is saintly Marichi i I de- sire to learn from him the route of a friend who had occasion to make a distant journey. The sage has an international reputation for miraculous powers of penetration.'
"With a deep-drawn, burning sigh he told this tale: 'Such a sage there was in this hermitage. To him one day there came in deep dejection a mem- ber of the frail sisterhood, named Kamamanjari.	She had fairly won her name as gem of the Anga capi- tal, but her breasts were starred with teardrops and her disheveled hair swept the ground as she paid him
..
•
7°	THE TEN PRINCES
homage. At the same moment a group of her rela- tives, headed by the mother, came running compas- sionately behind her and fell to the ground in a long line before the hermit. That merciful creature con- soled them with his liquid tones and asked the courte- zan the source of her distress; and she, with seeming shame, despondency, and dignity, replied: "Holy sir, your servant is a vessel of tribulation in this life, yet,
in hope of a blessed resurrection, takes refuge at your holy feet, known as a defense of the afflicted."
.. 'At this point the mother lifted her hands, touched the earth with hair dappled with grey, lifted her head, and spoke: "Holy sir, this your maid-serv- ant acquaints you with my own wrongdoing. And this wrongdoing of mine lay in the performance of my obvious duty. For obvious duty is as follows for the mother of afille dejoie: care of her daughter's person
from the hour of birth; nourishment	by a diet so regu- lated as to develop stateliness, vigor, complexion, in- telligence, while harmonizing the humors, gastric cale- faction, and secretions, not permitting her to see too much even of her father after the fifth year; festive ritual on birthdays and holy days; instruction in the arts of flirtation, 20th major and minor: thorough training in dance, song, instrumental music, acting,
painting, also judgment of foods, perfumes, flowers, not. forgetting writing and graceful speech; a conver- sational acquaintance with grammar, with logical in- ference and conclusion; profound skill in money-mak-
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	71 ing, sport, and betting on cockfights or chess; assidu-
ous use of go-betweens in the passages of coquetry; display of numerous well-dressed attendants .at re- ligious or secular celebrations; careful .selectlon of teachers to insure success at unpremeditated vocal and other exhibitions; advertising on a national scale
by a staff of trained specialists; publicity f~r ~eauty- marks through astrologers and such; eulogistic men- tion in gatherings of men about town of her beauty, character) accomplishments, charm) and sweetnesajry hangers-on) gay dogs, buffoons, female religionists, and crhersj.raising her price considerably when she has be- come an object of desire to young gentlem.en; su:ren-
der to a lover of independent fortune, a philogynist or one intoxicated by seeing her charms, a gentleman eminent for rank, figure, youth, money, vigor, purity, generosity, cleverness, gallantry, art, character, and sweetness of disposition: delivery, with gracious ex-
aggeration of value received, to one less affiuen~, b~t highly virtuous and cultivated (the alternative. IS levying on his natural guardians, after informal umon with such a gentleman) i collection of bad debts by vamping judge and jury; mothering a lover's daugh- ter; abstraction by ingenious tricks of money le:t in an admirer's possession after payment for pen- odical pleasures ; steady quarreling with a defaulter or
miser; stimulation of the spirit of generosity in an overthrifty adorer by the incentive of jealousy; re- pulse of the impecunious by biting speeches, by pub-
TIlE TEN PRINCES
lie taunts, by cutting his daughters. and by other em- barrassing habits. as well as by simple contempt; con- tinued clinging to the open-handed. the chivalrous, the blameless. the wealthy, with full consideration of the interrelated chances of money and misery.-
.. , "Besides, a courtezan should show readiness in- deed, hut no devotion to a lover; and. even if fond of him, ~he should not disobey mother or grandmother. I~ spite of all, the girl disregards her God-given voca-
tion and has spent a whole month of amusement-at her own expense l-e-with a Brahman youth, a fellow from nowhere whose face is his fortune. Her snippi- ness has offended several perfectly solvent admirers
and has pauperized her own family. And when I scol- ded her and told her: 'This is no kind of a scheme. This isn't pretty.' she was angry and took to the woods: And if she is obstinate, this whole family will stay right here and starve to death. There is nothing
else..t~ do."	And	the	mother	wept. Then the hermit spoke to the gay girl: "My
~ea: young woman, be assured that life in the forest
IS difficult Its reward i . h fi al	. .	.	.	ewar	IS eit	er	n	salvation	or a pe-
riod in Paradise	N	f h	he f	.	d d .	. ow0teseterormerISgroune
In ~rofound insight and is, as a rule, hardly attainable; ,:hlle th.e latt~r is easy for anybody who fulfils the du-
tlesofhlsstatlOn	Y	h d best resi	.. . .	.	au	a	est resign your VISionary
am~,l:~n and ~bide by your mother's judgment." ut she Impatiently rejected this sympathetic
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	73
counsel, saying: "If I find no refuge at your holy feet, may the god of fire provide a refuge for my misery:'
" 'So the hermit, after some reflection, said to the courtezan's mother: "Go home for a time. Wait a fewdays, until this delicate creature, wonted to pleas-
ant luxury, grows disgusted with the hardships of life in the forest and, with the aid of repeated homilies from me, returns to normalcy." And her relatives withdrew, assenting.
" 'Now the courtezan grudged no devotion to the holy hermit. She wore a neat and simple costume; was not overattentive to ornament; watered the seed- ling trees; took pains to gather bunches of flowers for
ceremonies of worship; made a pleasing variety of offerings;	provided	perfumes,	garlands,	incense, lamps, dance, song, and instrumental	music in honor of Love's chastiser, Shiva ; drew the hermit into cor- ners to discuss the relations of the three things worth
living for (virtue, money, and love); and discoursed
decorously of the Supreme Being. In a surprisingly
short time she had him in love. " 'One day, seeing that he was secretly smitten,
she said with a little smile: "Why) the world is a fool even to consider money and love in comparison with virtue." "Tell me) my soul," said Marichi, "by what percentage you value virtue above money and love." Thus encouraged, but slow and shy, she began:
.. ' "A poor, ignorant thing like me! Can I teach a
~."-JC.	_
THE TEN PRINCES
holy hermit the bigness or littleness of virtue, money, and love? Still, your question is just one more kind- ness to a servant. So listen. Of course, without virtue there isn't any money or love. But virtue without ~hose things gives us blissful felicity, and we can get Itbysimpleintrospection. Itdoesn'tdependsomuch on e~ternal.instrumentsJ	the way money and love do. ~nd If nourished by seeing the real Truth, it isn't hurt If you pursue-just	a little, you know-money	and love. Or if it is, it is restored without much trouble
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	75
and you win a special blessing by avoiding that sin in future. For example: Brahma pursued Tilottama Shiva violated a thousand wives of hermits Vishnu flirted with six~een thousand girls, Prajapa:i offered love even to his own daughter, Indra was Ahalya's paramour, the moon-god fouled his teacher's bed the s~n-god debauched a mare, the wind-god seduced the Wife of a monk	B ih	'
•
is not shackled by the indulgence of sense. But from birth I have never studied the doctrine of money and love. I ought to learn their nature, attendant condi-
tions, and reward." " • "Well," said she, "the nature of money is to be
earned, multiplied, and saved; its attendant condi- tions are agriculture, cattle-raising, trade, peace, war, and so forth; its reward is charity to the deserving. Love's nature lies in an exquisite contact with inef-
fable joy in a man and a woman whose minds concen- trate on sense-experience. Its attendant conditions are all that is blissful and blazing in this contact. And its reward is a manifest and self_communicated glad-
ness, intensely delightful, arising from reciprocal tan- gency, sweet in memory, occasioning self_approba- tion, supreme. For love's sake, men---even men who live in the most sacred places-endure	grievous mar-
tyrdoms, great sacrifices of money, terrible battles, sea-voyages, and other fearful dangers."
"'Hereupon, were it constraining destiny, or the woman's smartness, or his own dulness, he forgot his vows and yielded to her fascination,	She put the poor
booby in a carriage and carried him far away along the splendid public street to her own home in the city. And drums were beaten with the announcement:	"To- morrow is Love's festiva1."
.. 'The next day, when the sage had been bathed and anointed, had assumed a pretty garland, had practiced lovers' manners and so turned his back on
.	ey, rr aspan ran after Utathya's "':lfe, P~ras.hara deflowered a fisherman's daughter, ~ISson.intrigued with a brother's wife, Atri had deal-
thin with a doe. And when immortals do all those
t mgs such devil's t ' k d	,..	. ,	nc s on t Injure their virtue, be-
~ause they have the power of Truth	A d	h	1
Ispun 'fiedb' y virtue di t	' . n w en a sou ,	' tr never sticks any more than
in the sky. So I feel that money and love don't touch even one per cen t of virtue,"
", 'Having listened to this, the sage felt the tide of
passion surge, and he said' "M wise'	ith	.	Y pet, you are truly
• WI thosewhohave visionofth T h ' e rut, virtue
_________
d
1i
I
THE TEN PRINCES
his true profession that he grieved if a moment passed without her, she took him along the gaudy public street to a holiday crowd in a wooded garden, where the king sat among hundreds of young ladies. And when the king said with a smile: "My dear. be seated with His Holiness," she made a Buttering curtsy, smiled, and sat down.
" 'Thereupon a most beautiful woman rose, lifted her joined hands, and curtsied to the king, saying: "Your Majesty. she has won the bet. From this day I am her slave," Then the crowd raised a racket rooted in wonder and delight. The king too was delighted
anddismissed the courtezan with gracious gifts of pre- cious stones in settings and a great train of attend- ants, while the most eminent ladies of her profession and the most prominent citizens gave her a multi- tudinous ovation.
" 'She, however, before going home, said to the sage: "My duty to you, holy sir. You have put your servant under no transient obligation. You may now
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	77 1 wagered my freedom and went into the business.
And I won. Thank you so much," "'Thus cast off, the poor innocent repent~ and
listlessly returned to the woods. And I, dear SIr, am the wretched man whom she treated so. The whore who had the power to inspire passion, has herself, by withdrawing it, encouraged religion. Soon ,I shall ~e
able to bring myself to attend your business. Till
then, remain in Champa, the Anga capital.' "Now the sun went to his setting, as if fearful of
touching the darkness that drifted from the hermit's soul; the red Aare of passion left the sage to glea~.as evening twilight; the clusters of day-blooming. hh.es shrank together as if his tale had made them indif-
ferent to life. And I, having accepted the poor fellow's offer of aid, sat with him, telling twilight tales; shared his bed for the night; and when the red rays of
the waking sun-mocking	the blossoming twigs of ~e wishing-tree-shot	like a forest fire from Sunrise Peak, I said a respectful farewell and started for the
city. "In a lonely spot outside a monastery that stood
resume your vocation," "My darling" he cried
."
pncked by love as by a knife-point, "what does it mean? How can you be so cynical? What has be- come of your superlative fondness for me?"
,..
.. , "Holy sir," she replied with a smile "you saw ~he girl who just confessed defeat before th~ royal ret- mue. She and I once had a tiff, and she said with a sneer: 'You boast as if you had seduced Marichi.' So
a grove of red ashoka trees, careless of his rehgl~us meditations, wasted with mental misery, deserving first prize for homeliness-a	pitiful presence. An~ 1 noticed that the teardrops falling on his chest carried
lumps of dirt dislodged from his face. So I drew neat
beside the road 1 beheld a naked Jain monk seated in
THE TEN PRlNCES
and made inquiries. 'Austerities and tears,' I said, <fit ill together.	If it is no secret, I could wish to learn the Source of your sorrow:
.. 'Listen, kind sir,' he said. <Iam the eldest son of a prosperous merchant named Nidhipalira in this very Champa. and my name is Vasupalita. But my nick- name is Ugly, because I am ugly. There is another named Handsome in town, and he is handsome; he is rich in social attractions.	but ill endowed with wealth. Between him and me a quarrel was fomented on the subject of good looks and cash by such city scoun- drels as pick a living out of quarrels.	One day in a holiday gathering we indulged ourselves in a budget
of cutting taunts, rooted in mutual disdain. The
scoundrels had started the squabble themselves, but
they claimed to appease it by laying down this princi-
pIe: {C~either looks nor cash is the proof of manhood;
but he IS the best man whose youthful vigor attracts
the gayest girls. Now Kamamanjari	is the nonpareil
among these young persons. He whom she prefers,
may fly the flag of fortune."	We agreed and sent her our proposals.
" 'Now it was I who awakened a loving rapture in the creature.	At least, she came to me, as he and I sat tiere; darted at my person a dark-eyed. sidelong g ance that was both flower and fetter; and caused my embarrassed rival's face to fall. I fancied myself hap- PY. and made her mistress of my money. of my house,
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	79
of my household, of my person, of my life. She left me a loin cloth. Cast off as a beggar, the target of univer- sal ridicule, unable to endure the gibes of the city's dignitaries, I welcomed instruction concerning the path of salvation from a certain monk in this heretic monastery; then, considering how natural was such a costume for those emerging from a house of evil fame, I felt a surge of religious despair, and abandoned the loin cloth, too.
H	'But presently, when the dirt caked on my per- son, when my hair was plucked till it hurt horribly, when I suffered the exquisite tortures of hunger and thirst, when even in standing, sitting. lying, and eat- ing I was cramped like a new-caught elephant in dis- ciplinary chains, 1 pondered profoundly: "I am of Brahman origin. It is irreligious in me to condescend to this heretical course. My forefathers trod the path prescribed by revelation and sacred tradition. And I am sunk so low as to wear scandal-breeding canoni-
cals, to invite condign chastisement, and even-by hearing constant blasphemies against Vishnu, Shiva, Brahma, and other true gods-to	harvest hell when 1 am dead. Such doctrine, fruitless, deceitful, false! To think that I should practice it as true!" with that es- timate of my own perversity, 1 betook myself to this lonely clump of ashokas, and here 1 weep profusely.'
"At this point I pitied him and said: 'Be patient, sir. Remain here yet a little while. 1 will endeavor to
80
THE TEN PR1NCES
persuade that female to make voluntary restitution of your possessions. There are ways and means.' So I consoled him and rose to take farewell.
"Even while entering the city, I learned from street gossip that the town was fuU of skinflints and capitalists; and. since I desired to bring these gentry to ortho~ox thinking by revealing the perishable na- tu~e of riches, I resolved to tread the path of scientific thIevery. 1 did not sit down until I had entered a dive and mingled with the professionals.	I found no end of
enjoyment observing their skill in all the twenty-five branches of the aft of gambling: their sleight of hand, extremely difficult to detect, over the dice-board; the accompanying sneers and jeers; their death-defying truculence; their systems (chiefly argument, force,
and bluff) devised to gain a gambler's confidence and calculated to win the stakes; their flattery of the strong; their threats toward the weak: their clever- ness in picking partners; their fantastic means of al- lurement; the varied wagers proposed; their magnani- mous way of dividing the cash; the intermittent	buzz
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	8r
thousand dinars. Half I gave to the proprietor and his staff; half I pocketed. Then I rose, and with me rose delighted congratulations from the company. I humored the proprietor's invitation and shared a most noble banquet in his establishment.	But he who had occasioned my gambling incarnation, became a friend, trustworthy as a second heart. His name was Vimardaka.
"From his lips I studied every house in the city, with emphasis on wealth, occupation, and character; then in a darkness black as the stain on Shiva's neck, clad in the concealment of a black cloak, girded with a sharp sword, provided with a varied kit-trowel, scissors, tweezers, dummy, magic powder, trick lamp, measuring-tape,	hook,	cord,	dark	Ian tern,	bee-basket, and other tools-I	visited the house of a miserly capi- talist; breached the wall; penetrated the interior un-
perceived through an opening narrow as a telescope, all as unconcerned as if entering my own dwelling; ap- propriated considerable capital; and departed.
"On the public street, dense with palpable dark- ness from black and crowding clouds, I suddenly per- ceived a momentary splendor like a lightning flash. This resolved itself into a young woman wearing gleaming gems; she drew near, having issued forth at that spacious hour, and seemed the city's guardian goddess angered at theft in the city.
"And when I sympathetically inquired: 'What is your name? What is your goal, my soul?' she stam-
of talk, largely obscene; and much besides.
"N h ow w en a player made a careless throw I
laug~ed a little. But his Opponent seemed to flare ~p,
~ooklng at me with an eye red with wrath	and shout-
In' 'M·	,
g.	. an, you tell him how to play when you laugh.
Let this uneducated duffer go. I'll just play with you
-rou. seem a smart one.' The proprietor offered no
ObJeCtlOn'he	I·	h d	. h . cme e Wit me, and I won sixteen
82	THE TEN PRINCES
mered this terrified reply: 'In this city, sir, lives a most worthy merchant, Kuberadatta. I am his daughter. At my birth my father promised me as wife to a certain Dhanamitra, a wealthy youth of our own city. He, however, showed an extraordinary no- bility: when his parents perished, with his own proper- ty he purchased poverty (if the expression is permis- sible) from a throng of jobbers. As a consequence, people pleasantly tacked to him the honorable sobri- quet of "Mister Noble"; and poor as he was, he still sought my hand. But now that I am a woman, my father refuses me to a beggar and plans to bestow me on a certain wholesaler named Arthapati-a	rich man, as the name indicates. This calamity, you must know, impends at dawn of day. I knew it, and con- sented to a meeting with my darling. I gave my serv- ants the slip; and through the street where I played as a girl, I go to his dweIJing-a	woman whose escort is love. Do not prevent me. Take this treasure.' And unfastening her jewels, she handed them to me.
" 'You are a good girl: I said, consoling her. 'Come, let me accompany you to your lover's house.' But when I had taken three or four steps, the gleam of a torch stole our shroud of darkness; and a sizable squad of police fell upon us, baton and sword in hand. 'Feel no fear, my dear,' said I to the trembling girl. 'The last resort is this arm of mine, with its friendly sword. But from regard for you] have devised a
pleasant plan. I will lie here, counterfeiting the
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	83
cramps of deadly poison, while you tell those fellows: "We entered this city by night. My escort-whom you see-r-was stung by a serpent there at the corner of the public hall. If you have any kindly necromancer who can restore him, he would also save a helpless woman's life.'"	And the maiden, there being no other way, put a terrified stammer into her tone and a storm of tears into her eyes, tremblingly tottered for-
ward, and repeated my words, while I lay counterfeit-
..
mg pOlson cramps. "So I was examined by one of them, who fancied
himself as a poison specialist. He treated me with sig- net rings, charms, spells, silent prayer, and other spe- cifics-without	success. Then he reported: 'It was a cobra. He is done for. You can see that his limbs are rigid and discolored, his eye is filmy, his respiration has just ceased. Weep your fill, my soul. Tomorrow we shall have a cremation. Who escapes fate?' And off he went with the others.
"I rose and conducted her to Mister Noble, to whom 1 said: '1 am a thief. 1 met this lady in mid- journey; she was on her way to you, escorted by a lov-
ing heart. 1 sympathized and brought her safe. These jewels are hers.' And 1 gave him a gleaming mass that cleft the veil of darkness.
"Mister Noble took them and said, his shyness struggling with his joy: 'Sir, you have this night given me my darling, but stolen my power of speech, for I know not how to express myself	Shall I call your
i!
THE TEN PRINCES
action unique? I should be lessening your constant character. Shall I call it unequaled by others? The comparison would limit your natural faculty, since avarice and other human failings are foreign to you. Shall I aver that you have this day breathed life into virtue? The statement would be quite discourteous to your previous glories. Shall I say that nobility has now found its true externalization ? Such an assertion". would be improper, as neglecting your normal pur- pose. Shall I declare that your generous deed has pur- chased my freedom? I should insult your intelligence, implying an extravagant price for a trifle. Shall I swear that this body is yours, a return for the gift of my love? I should forget that this body, destined to death if I lost her, is also your gift. Ah, only this statement will fit the case: you must care for me from this hour, since I am your slave,' And he fell at my feet.
"I helped him to rise, pressed him to my breast, and said: 'Dear sir, what is your present purpose?' And he replied: 'Without her parents' consent I cannot marry her and live here. Therefore, this very night I plan to flee the coun try . Yet who am I, to be honored by your concern?'
" 'Right,' said 1. 'The discerning man does not reckon lands as native or foreign. However, this lady is exquisitely dainty, and forest trails are roughly strewn with hardships. Such an unmotivated flight
from the country smacks of a certain flabbiness, both
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	85
of intelligence and character.	It is better to live with her happily in this very city. Come, let us take her to her own dwelling.' He agreed without demur; we took her home at once; and while she served as picket, he and 1 stripped the house to the bare clay walls.
"Then, after an expedition to conceal our booty, we fell in with policemen; and finding a must elephant kneeling beside the road, we tossed the driver off and mounted. But even as 1 made the animal rise, he tan- gled his forefeet in his neck-rope; and since he braced himself on the broad chest of the fallen driver, his great tusk was smeared with clinging gore when he pounded the police. We used him to pulverize Arrha- pati's house. Next, we drove him into a deserted gar- den and dismounted by catching the branch of a tree.
Then we started horne, had a bath, and went to bed. "Presently the sun's disc was lifted; it seemed the ruby horn of splendid Sunrise Peak lifting from the sea and was gay as a golden garland of flowers from
the wishing-tree.	We rose, washed our faces, repeated our morning prayers, then roamed the town agog at Our exploits, and listened to the babble in the houses of bridegroom and bride. Arthapati was consoling Kuberadatta in the matter of money, but postpon- ing for a month his marriage with the daughter of the family.
"Thereupon I whispered these instructions to Dha- namitra: 'Visit the Anga king, my friend, and secret- ly show him this wallet of choice leather, saying:
86
THE TEN PRINCES
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	87
ture.' Herewith he gave it to me, and as I bowed, he vanished in a rocky cave. This priceless leather wal- let I have brought, feeling that I should not make a living by it without previous report to Your Majesty. Of course, Your Majesty is the final arbiter."
" 'Now the king will be quite certain to say: "I am delighted, my dear sir. Go, and enjoy your treas- ure to the full." Thereupon you will say: "Be gra- ciously pleased to see that nobody steals it." This also he will assuredly promise. You will then go home, will disburse charity according to a set program, will worship the wallet each day, will fill it each night with the proceeds of robbery, and each morning will ex- hibit it to the populace. Presently greedy Kubera- datta, no longer caring a straw for Arthapati, will vol- untarily approach you with his daughter. Next, purse-proud Arthapati will be angry and try to sue you; after which, you and I, by artful dodges, will leave him with a loin cloth. Besides, this mnneuvre
will quite conceal our own thievery.' "Dhanamitra	was delighted and did as I sugges-
ted. That very day Vimardaka, at my instigation, en- tered Arthapati's service and fanned his hostility to Mister Noble; while greedy Kuberadatta turned his back on Arthapati, obsequiously offering his daughter to Dhanami tra. And Arthapati fought back.
"In these same days announcement was made that ~amamanjari's younger sister Ragamanjari was to grve a musical performance in public, so that gay so-
"Your Majesty surely knows me. I am Dhanamitra, only son of Vasumitra, the multimillionaire; but a throng of needy beggars stripped me, so that I be- came an object of derision. And when Kuberadatta, reproaching my poverty, planned to give to Arrha- pati his daughter, a sweet girl betrothed to me from
birth, I entered an unkempt garden near the city, re- solved to die of heartache. But a tangle-haired her- mit snatched the knife from my throat, asking: 'What is the cause of this desperate deed?' 'Poverty,' said I,
'own brother of derision.' " '''Now he took pity on me, saying: <Youare a
fool, my boy. There is nothing more wholly reprehen- sible than suicide. Good men do not destroy the soul; they use the soul to save the soul. There are many means of making money, but no means of making life by patching a cut throat. And what need? I know my
thaumaturgy: I have contrived this magic wallet of choice leather which holds a lakh. With its aid I granted their desires to people during a long residence in Assam; but when envious age assailed me, I came hither, hoping to find this region a heaven on earth. I give the wallet to you. In other hands than mine it is said to work only for merchants and courtezans-
Moreover, anything sinfully stolen by its owner, must first be restored; anything honestly earned must be given to gods and Brahmans. Then, if set in
a hallowed spot and worshiped like a god, it will be found filled with gold every morning. Such is its na-
n
88
THE TEN PRINCES
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	89
character. She declares: "My price is virtue, not cash. Hereafter, no gentleman may hold my hand ex- cept in matrimony." Now her sister Kamamanjari, failing in repeated dissuasion, and her mother Ma- dhavasena sobbed out this tearful petition to the king: "Your Majesty, we had high hopes that your servant Ragamanjari-with character, accomplishments, and cleverness to match her beauty-would	fulfil our am- bitions for her. But she is a complete disappoint- ment: she breaks every family tradition; she is in- different to money, and expects virtue as payment for youthful favors. She obstinately apes the conduct of a good woman. Now if-even	at the cost of Your Maj- esty's high intervention-she	should at last return
to normal manners, it would be a sweet relief." « 'And when she still turned a deaf ear to the ad- monitions of the obliging king, her mother and sister besought the sovereign with importunate tears: "If any snake should deceive and ruin the girl against our
will, you must torture him to death like a thief." So matters stand: her relatives will not consent without money, and she will show no favor to a man who offers money. You must reconcile these opposites.' 'There is nothing to reconcile,' said 1. 'We will seduce her with virtue and secretly satisfy her relatives with money.'	I
"So I won the good will of Kamamanjari's	chief	I; go-between, a certain Buddhist nun named Dharma- rakshita, with such bribes as tatters and scraps: and through her mediation I struck this bargain with the
ciery gathered with tense anticipation. too) with my friend Dhanamitra.	And when her dance began, there was a second dance on the stage of my heart. For the archer-god lurked in the cover of the lotus cluster which her flashing glances made, and tortured me terribly, seeming to draw power from the
medley of all emotions and sentiments dramatically communicable. She seemed the city's guardian god- dess angered at theft in the city as she fettered me in the twining coils of coquettish glances darkly gleam-
ing like blue lilies' glossy petals. After the dance, as she stood, a shining success-whether	flirtatiously, or graciously, or fortuitously, I do not know-she	darted at me, unobserved even by the girls, more than one peeping glance with playful fluttering of arching
brows; then, with a little careless, gleaming smile, de- parted, still escorted by the eyes and thoughts of all. I went home, my hunger replaced by resistless long- ing, and feigning a headache, lay limp on my lonely
bed.
"Now Dhanamitra, deeply versed in the book of love, came to me with this confidential report: 'My friend, that courtezan is blest indeed, to whom your heart is thus devoted. I have closely followed the
course of her feelings, too; the archer-god will soon stretch her also on a bed of arrows. A meeting is sim- ple to arrange, since you both pursue an honorable purpose. But you must know that this gay girl adopts a most elevated style, running counter to cour tezan
I was there
THE TEN PRINCES
cocotte-that I should steal from Mister Noble and give to her the miraculous wallet, in return for Raga- manjari. Receiving her assent, I put the matter through; then seduced Ragamanjari by my virtue, and plucked the flower of her hand.
"On the evening when the theft of the magic wal- let became known. in the hearing of noteworthy men about town (summoned ostensibly for another pur- pose) my spy Vimardaka, a nominal partisan of Ar-
thapati, turned upon Dhanamitra and rated him roundly. 'Sir; said Dhanamitra, 'what object has this barking at me in another man's quarrel? I do not recall doing you the slightest injury,' 'Regular purse- pride!' retorted the other, still seeming to scold. 'After
the other fellow has paid his honest tax for a wife, you dazzle her parents with cash and try to get the girl. Then you ask: "What injury have I done you?" 'Well, everyone knows that Vimardaka is the projected life of wholesaler Arthapati. Here I am-I am ready to give my life for him. I wouldn't shrink from Brah- man-murder. If I wanted to keep my eyes open just
one night, I could lower the high temperature of your pride in that magic wallet.' Still speaking, he was bustled away by prominent citizens) who indignantly tried to squelch him.
"This occurrence) with a previous reference to the loss of the magic wallet) was reported with counterfeit distress by Dhanamitra to the king) who summoned
Arthapati and privately inquired: 'Sir, have you
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	91
acquaintance with one Vimardaka?' 'Certainly, Your Majesty,' replied the booby. 'He is a very close friend. What service can he render?' 'Can you pro- duce him?' asked the king. 'Assuredly I can/ said he) and going forth) he searched minutely but vainly in his own house, among the gay girls, in the gambling dive, in the market. How could the lubber find him? Inasmuch as Vimardaka, commissioned by me, and
having received from me a token by which to recog- nize you) my prince, had started that same day for Ujjain to search for you) sir. So Arthapati, failing to find him, and feeling his own responsibility for the fel- ony) was mad enough or frightened enough to contra-
" diet himself; and after demonstration by Dhanami- tra, was seized by order of the angry king and thrown into chains.
"In these same days Kamnmanjari, desiring to milk the magic wallet with due regard to all condi- tions imposed) paid a secret visit to Mister Ugly, whom she had previously milked dry and converted into a naked heretic. She restored his entire stolen fortune and returned only after begging his forgive-
ness with no end of amenity. And he, his soul thus snatched from naked heresy by my pastoral ministra- tions, returned with extreme delight to his true reli- gion. The lady meanwhile.in her eagerness to milk the magic wallet, stripped her house in a very few days to the bare fireplace.
"Then at my suggestion, Dhanamitra confided in
THE TEN PRINCES
the king: 'Your Majesty, the girl Kamamanjari is so outrageously grasping that people have fastened upon her the nickname Greedy-girl; yet today she is heed- lessly throwing away her furniture, down to mortar and pestle. This, I believe, results from her posses- sion of my magic wallet. for such is its nature. It is said to work only for merchants and courtezans. I have my suspicions of her.' And she. with her mother, was 'immediately summoned before the king.
"I took her aside to say with simulated agitation: 'Surely, madam, your thorough and strikingly public generosity has brought you under suspicion of posess- ing the magic wallet. You are summoned by the Anga king to answer for this; and if repeatedly pressed. you are certain to plead its acquisition through me. Then I shall be put to death by torture. And when I am dead, your sister will cease to live. And you have be- come a beggar. And the magic wallet will return to Dhanamitra. This emergency is calamitous, however you face. What remedy is there?'
.. 'Too true: replied she and her mother with tears. 'Through our childish simplicity the secret is as good as out. If the king insists, though we may deny twice, thrice, even four times, we are sure to impute the theft to you. And at the mention of your name our whole family would be ruined. Well, this disgrace :o~ts in Ar~hapati; and the whole capital knows our intimacy with that lumpkin. We can best shield our-
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	93
selves by claiming that he gave it to us.' This I ap- proved, and the two ladies went to court.
"There the king examined them, saying: 'It is not decent for courtezans to pretend to charity, since it is no decently earned money that men bring to them.' He hammered this point home, terrifying them by hints of the slitting of ears and noses, until those two damned whores accused the wretched Arthapati of the theft. The king in a fury condemned him to death, but was restrained by none other than Dhanamitra, who respectfully pleaded: 'Oh, sir, royal tradition graciously grants exemption from the death penalty to merchants guilty of such felonies. If you feel furi- ous, confiscate the criminal's property and exile him.'
"Thus Dhanamitra received wide applause, the monarch was gratified, and purse-proud Arthapati, re- duced to a single rag, was exiled in view of the whole city. A certain portion of his possessions the king, fol- lowing a compassionate suggestion of Dhanamitra, bestowed on Kamamanjari,	who, duped by the mirage of the magic wallet, had quite stripped herself. Dha- namitra married his good girl on a lucky day. And I, successful in my stratagem, filled a house with gold and gems for Ragaman jeri.
"But the skinflint and capitalist class in that city was so plucked that its members wandered for alms, begging howl in hand, from house to house of the des- titute class, now grown wealthy with their property,
•
94	THE TEN PRINCES
bestowed by me. For no man. however shrewd. can cross the line traced by fate. So in my own case: one day I was ingratiatingly offering Ragamanjari some- thing to drink in order to end a lovers' quarrel, and when I had too often sipped the wine of her lips, sweetly and repeatedly offered, I was smitten by an intemperate madness. Now it is the nature of intem- perance and enthusiasm to adopt a wrong method in habitual actions. So, as madness mounted, I cried: <In a single night I could steal all the money in this city and fill your house with it;' and repelling hun- dreds of humble obsecrations from my dearest, like a must elephant fiercely snapping his chain. with no great retinue. but attended by a nurse named Shrigc- lika, I started, sword in hand, as impetuous as you please. Even when I met policemen, I attacked them without thinking, and was not 'particularly angry when they took me for a thief and struck me. It
I
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE 95
will certainly be apprehended tomorrow. Here, how- ever, is a scheme which, if carried through according to my directions) will preserve them and possibly pull me out of this hole.'
"So, when I had mentally settled on a plan) I snarled at Shrigalika: 'Be off, you lump of anility, and be damned to you! It was you who introduced that cursed courtezan, that scaly Ragamanjari to my en- emy, my pretended friend Dhanamitra, crazy over his magic wallet! Because I stole that scoundrel's
~agic purse and prigged your daughter's priceless Jewels) I have to lose my innocent life today!'
"She was supremely clever: she caught my drift, and lifting her hands) humbly approached the men. She softened them with her tear-choked tone and begged in my hearing: 'Gentlemen, please wait long enough for me to learn from him exactly what has been stolen from us.' When they consented, she turned again to me, fell at my feet, and said: 'Oh, sir, forgive your servant's single offense. Of course) you
must hate Dhanamitra-he	seduced your wife. But you .ought to pardon your humble Ragamanjari- consider how long she was faithful to you. And when a girl lives by her looks, her gewgaws are her soul. Tell me where her gems are hidden.'
. "With a pretense of pity, I said: 'Yes, death has his hand upon me. Why should I persist in hating the woman?' Then, as if answering her inquiry, I whis- pered in her ear that she must do thus and so. And
seemed a game. But the sword dropped from my groggy hand) so that I only killed two or three before falling, my eyes rolling and bloodshot. The nurse ran to me at once) with bleats of misery; but my enemies fettered me.	l
"Misfortune banished madness: I was sober in a moment, and my returning wits at once admonished me: 'Dear me! This is no small disaster, due to my own dementia. Besides) everyone knows that Dhana- mitra is my friend and Ragamanjari my bride. For my wrongdoing they will both be tracked down and
•
THE TEN PRINCES
she, feigning enlightenment, said: 'Long life to you! May the gods be gracious to you! May our lord, the Anga king, liberate you-he loves a man. And may these kind gentlemen be good to you.' She hurried away; and I, by order of the police captain, was led to
jail.
"The next day I met Kantaka, the jailer. He was rather conceited, imagined himself handsome and a lady killer, had recently inherited the job from his de- funct father, and was somewhat young, flighty, and green. He gave me a bit of a lecture, then said: 'If you refuse to return Dhanamitra's magic purse or if you fail to restore your pickings and stealings to the citizens, you will see the eighteen tortures one after another and end up by learning what death looks like.'
" 'My dear sir,' I answered with a smile, 'suppose I should restore all the money I have stolen since I was born, I could not fill the greedy maw of the magic wallet of my enemy Dhanamitra, that false friend who stole Arthapati's wife. Besides, I would endure ten thousand tortures sooner than give it up. You may regard this as final.' In some such fashion pro- ceeded our daily inquisition, half wheedling, half bul- lying, while with congenial food and drink my wounds were healing, so that in a few days I was quite myoid self.
"Now at a time when the day was dying in a blaze of sunlight yellow as Vishnu's robe, Shrigalika came with joyful face and flaming dress, waved the attend-
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	97
ants aside, snuggled close, and said: 'I congratulate you, sir. Your admirable plan bears fruit. As you bade me, I found Dhanamitra and said: "Sir, your friend. having met such and such a misfortune, sends you this message: '1 am today in jail through the fault of drink (natural when one associates with cour- tezans); do not delay; this very day you must memo- rialize the king in these terms: "Your Majesty, through Your Majesty's grace that magic purse, sto- len by Arthapati, has been recovered. But I scraped an acquaintance with a certain gambling sharp, Ra-
gamanjari's husband. because of his wonderful finesse in the polite arts, in poetical questions. and in social tittle-tattle.	Knowing him, I humored his wife by sending her daily such trifles as dresses and jewels. Now that vulgar-minded gambler suspected me and was angered to the point of stealing the magic wallet and his wife's jewel casket. On his next thieving ex- pedition he Wascaught by the police. Once in trouble, he obeyed the impulse of earlier affection for a nurse
of Ragaman jari, who had followed him weeping, and revealed to her the spot where the jewels lay hidden. Now if he could be neatly inveigled into surrendering my magic wallet as well. then Your Gracious Majesty might pardon him:'
.. , "'Thus approached, the king will not execute me, but will actually try coaxing to make me restore your property. This will work to our advantage: " Now Dhanamitra obeyed instructions exactly, and
I (.
5
THE TEN PRINCES
with no great apprehension, so confident was he of your competence.
"'I, for my part, convinced Ragamanjari with the token from you, got from her all the money I wanted, and, in the way that you indicated, won over Manga- lika, nurse of Princess Ambalika. Using her as a
bridge, I promoted a tremendous friendship between Ragamanjari and Ambalika. And since I was the bearer of fresh presents every day and was lavish with ravishing stories, I basked in the princess' favor.
t< 'One day as she sat on the palace balcony, I made a pretense of fixing the lotus over her eat, as if it were falling (though it sat well enough); feigning to fumble, I knocked it off; then picked it up from the floor and dropped it on Kantaka, who on some errand had entered the courtyard near the princess' cham- bers; and in the act I laughed aloud, pretending to
scare some billing and cooing pigeons. So he thought
he had made a hit and glanced up with a smirk, while
the princess laughed heartily at my carryings-on ; then
I went through a smart little pantomime, so that he
might imagine her conduct flirtatious, with himself
the object of her attention. The love-god tautened
his bow and pierced the policeman with a venom-
tipped, bewildering shaft; yet he contrived to stagger from the spot.
.. 'In the evening I visited Kantaka's dwelling, with a little girl carrying a basket which, I said, came from Ragamanjari's	house; it bore the seal or the prin-
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE	99
cess' signet ring and contained scented betel gum, two silk garments, and an assortment of jewels. Sunk in passion's unplumbed sea, he regarded me as a res- cue ship, and rejoiced exceedingly. And when I de- scribed the vicissitudes of the princess' sufferings, the
simpleton turned quite maudlin. At his request, I brought him next day-saying	that his love sent them-a	sticky mass of gum (my own leavings), faded flowers, and soiled linen. And I took things from him for the princess, which I secretly threw away.
"'When love's flame had thus been kindled, I took him aside and tutored him. "Sir," said I, "the mystic marks on your person are not misleading. For a neighbor of mine, a fortune-teller, informs me: 'This
kingdom will fall into Kantaka's hand. His mystic marks make that a certainty.' Naturally, then, this princess loves you. So the king, having no other issue, will indeed be angry when he learns that you have had dealings with her, yet fearing his daughter's death,
will not only not destroy you, but will actually make you crown prince. Thus this business fits into predes- tined events. Why not serve fortune, my son? If you can devise no means or entering the princess' cham- bers, still the interval between prison wall and park palings measures only three fathoms. For that dis-
tance you can have a tunnel dug by some handy house-breaker. And when you enter the park, you will find sentinels in our service. For her servants are truly devoted and will not split."
---......_-------
7
100	THE TEN PRINCES
It. "A splendid scheme, dear lady," said he. "I happen to have a thief, a genuine son of Sagara for digging. If we take him, he will do this job in a jiffy." "Which one is he?" said 1. "And why not take him?" Whereupon he indicated you with the words: "The fellow who stole that magic wallet of Dhanamitra."
" , "Well then," I said, "you must come to an agreement with him, swearing that, once this job is done. you will set him free with happy dispatch.	And when the work is over, you will fetter him once more, reporting to the king that this well-known thief is quite recovered, but so audacious and vindictive that he will not disclose the magic purse. Then you will give him his happy dispatch-in	a word, kill him. Thus your aim is gained, and the secret does not leak." He agreed with delight and waits without) having del- egated me to tempt you. You must plan the next step.'
"'You have left me little to say,' I replied pleas- antly. 'Your plan covers the case. Bring him in.' So the fellow was introduced and took an oath to set me free, while I swore not to betray the secret.
"My fetters were removed) I enjoyed a bath) food, and ointment; then began at the corner of the prison wall where the darkness was dense and dug a tunnel with a snake's-head spade. And I reflected: 'The man took an oath to free me) while it was in his mind to kill me. Even if I kill him) I am no oath-breaker.'
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE 101
As I emerged) he extended his hand to fetter me, but I felled him with a kick in the chest and cut off his head with a knife. Then I said to Shrigalika: 'Tell me, my dear, about the entrance to the women's apartmen ts. I should not like this laborious job to prove unproductive.	I will prig some little memento there before I leave.'
"At the spot which she indicated, I made my way into the maidens' quarters. There) in the blaze of jeweled lamps I beheld the princess securely sleeping
among attendants who slumbered sound after their giddy games. She lay on a couch whose ivory feet were shaped to the likeness of recumbent lions and set with splendid precious gems; its pillows were stuffed with swan' s-down; and sea ttered flowers were strewn about its border. The instep of her left foot nestled beneath the right heel; the ankle showed a slight,
sweet outward sweep; the calves lay close; the dainty knees were bent; the thighs had a graceful curve. One soft and shapely arm hung limp over the hip; the other comely arm was bent so that its open, flowerlike hand rested beside her cheek. Over the swell of the hips clung close the shift of Chinese silk. The lower
I·	body had a trim elegance; the generous breasts, like two budding blossoms, trembled in answer to each deep breath. On the charming flexure of the neck shone a necklace of rubies strung on a string of bur., nished gold; one earring lay snug, peeping from be- neath a lovely ear half hidden) while the jeweled oma-
7
TIlE TEN PRINCES
ment of the lovely ear which was wholly visible, dart- ed pencils of light, gilding the ribbons in the loose- hanging hair that they informally fastened. The slight parting of two red lips was hardly noted by eyes intent on the innate beauty of each; one blossom-hand caressed and decked her cheek; shadowed in the mir- ror of her upper cheek, the bed's gay canopy rendered cosmetic service; the lotus-eyes were closed, becalmed the banner of the brows. Upon her forehead the beauty-spot of sandal paste was loosened by little in-
vading pearls of weariness; like vines that stretch toward the moon, the Jocks of hair curled toward her face. Securely sleeping, in quiet recovery from gay and giddy play, one side half sinking in the dazzling
whiteness of the coverlet, she seemed a lightning-flash lying in the lap of an autumn cloud.
"At this vision the red fire of desire darted sparks;
I was frightened; I lost all lust for stealing; nay, my
own heart was stolen. by her; I stood for a moment un-
certain, but thinking hard: 'If I do not win this sweet-
eyed maid, love will not let me live. Yet if I approach
her without warning, she will surely scream and slay
my hopes, for she is a mere girl. Then my life would
be forfeit. So this must be my plan.' I took from a
bracket a tablet colored with a resinous paste, drew a
brush from a jewel box, and wrote the following quat-
rain, referring to her, lying thus asleep, and me, pros- trate at her feet:
102
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE
Your slave bows low to seek This one petition meek: Sleep not so like a bride-s- I am not at your side.
IOJ
__________	t1iz	_
"From a golden basket I took a preparation of scented betel leaves, a bit of camphor, and some coral, tree gum, chewing them to produce a liquor red as lac; so with the tip of my tongue 1 outlined on the plaster
of the wall a pair of loving sheldrake birds. Then 1 ef- fected an exchange of rings and tore myself away.
"Returning through the tunnel into the prison, I found a fellow-prisoner, an estimable citizen named Simhaghosha, with whom I had fraternized in recent days. I told him how I had killed the wretched Kan, taka and how he could win liberty by turning infor-
mer. Then I departed with Shrigalika. "On the highway I fell in with a police patrol. And
I thought: 'I can escape by running. They would never touch me. But she would be caught, poor thing! So this is better.' I scuttled straight toward them, clapped my elbows to my back, wheeled around, and cried: 'Gentlemen, gentlemen! If I am a thief, tie me
up. That is your job, not this elderly female's.' "From so slight a hint she divined my strategy,
obsequiously drew near, and whimpered: 'Dear gen- tlemen, this is my Son. He has long been under treat- ment for lunatic seizures. Just yesterday he seemed pretty well, quite his true self indeed. So I made bold
THE TEN PRINCES
to take off his strait-jacket; gave him a bath, oint- ment, two spick-and-span garments; made him eat boiled rice and milk; and left him free on his bed last evening. But in the night he had another seizure, shouted out: "I'm going to kill Kantaka and make love to the princess," and started down the highway full gallop. When I saw my son in such a state, I fol- lowed, not minding the time of night. Please, please tie him up and give him back to me.'
"I turned on her with a shout: 'You ancient fe- male, who has ever tied the wind-god? How can these crows fetter the monarch of the birds? Heaven for- bid!'
"Then those fellowssaid to her: 'You are a luna- tic yourself. You think a lunatic is sane and set him free. Who cares to tie him now?' And to the tune of this taunting and trimming, she chased after me, cry- ing. I led the way to Ragamanjari's house, where I lavished redundant consolation on my bride drooping under the strain of long separation; and there I spent the rest of the night. At dawn I found Mister Noble.
"Next I visited holy Marichi who, recuperating from his difficulty with the gay girl, had recovered di- vine insight at the heavy cost of renewed austerities, a,nd who instructed me that my meeting with you, SIr,would take place in the circumstances since real- ized. Meanwhile. Simhaghosha had disclosed Kan ta- ka's dereliction and had been appointed to the vacant office by the gratified king. He procured me-through
APAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE 105
the same tunnel from the prison-s-a second entrance to the chamber of the princess, who received me pleasantly, having learned the story from Shrigalika and taken a fondness to me.
"In these same days Chandavarman, whose suit of Simhavarman's daughter had been repulsed. angrily clashed with him and besieged the capital. While he strove to close in, the Anga king. too impet- uous to await allies. however near, himself breached the wall, issued forth, and fought a superior enemy. In that great struggle Simhavarman's armor was pierced. and he was forcibly captured. Then Chandavarman roughly seized Ambalika, conveying her to his quar- ters for a forced marriage; and we heard that he was
dressing for a wedding at daybreak. "Now I was in Dhanamitra's	house. making cer-
tain festive preparations for that same wedding; and I said: 'My friend, a group of kings allied with the Anga sovereign. is close at hand. Using the utmost secrecy, you and the city elders must direct them hither. When you arrive, you will see an enemy shorter by a head.'
"He assented. None noticed my knife as with the rest I entered the doomed scoundrel's quarters, noisy with holiday bustle, cluttered with wedding parapher- nalia, packed by a press of people crowding in or squeezing out. He was just ready to grasp the blos- som-hand of Ambalika which droning clergymen be- fore the sacred fire were offering with scriptural ritu-
, I
106	THE TEN PRINCES
al, when I clutched his long, strong arm, and drove the knife to his heart. A few others also effervesced, and 1 sent them below.
"As I stalked through the smitten, shaken quar~ ters, I perceived the sweetly trembling form of the wide-eyed princess; I carried her into an inner cham- ber, longing for a blissful kiss. Just at that moment I was honored by hearing your voice, sir, deep as the roll of thunder from fresh-forming clouds."
Now Prince Rajavahana, having listened to this history, said with a smile: "Well, as a rough customer you excel the professor of theft." He then turned to Upaharavarman with the words: "Your story now.
You have the next turn." The latter smiled, bowed, and began.
CHAPTER VIII UPAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE
"During my wanderings I found myself one day in the Videha coun try. Wi thou ten tering the capi tal Mi- thila, I sought repose at a hermit's dwelling outside. Here an aged hermit woman gave me water to wash my feet, and I rested for a moment on the terrace. But from her first sight of me she strangely shed a limitless stream of tears. And when I inquired: 'What is this, mother? Tell me the reason,' she recited her pitiful tale.
"'You must have heard. sir-long life to you!- that the sovereign of this city Mithila bore the name Praharavarman. He and King Rajahansa of Maga- dha were friends as close as the fabled Bala and Sham- bala, while their dear queens, Vasumati and Priyam- veda, were such friends as you never saw. So Priyam- vada, with consort as escort, came to Blossom City, eager to see her dear Vasumati and wish her joy of her first baby .
.. 'Just at that time the king of Magadha fought a great fight with the king of Malwa, after which the king of Magadha went the way that ends in the van- ishing point. The king of Malwa took pains to spare our monarch, who started for his own land; but learn- ing that his kingdom had been usurped by Vikatavar-
'"I
108	THE TEN PRINCES
man and the other sons of his eldest brother Samhara- varman, and hoping for the gift of some kind of army from his sister's son, lord of the Suhma country, he ventured on forest trails and was plucked bare by wild looters.
" 'Now I held the younger of two baby princes in my arms; alone with him I fled deep into the jungle, terrified by the flights of wild men's arrows. There I tumbled when a tiger's claws skimmed close, and the baby dropped from my hands beneath a cow that lay there dead. While the tiger tugged at the body, his life was snuffed out by a shaft from a bow. The baby was seized by wild Bhillads.	Then a shepherd carried me, swooning and senseless, to his hut, where he gently healed my hurts. When I recovered, I felt I must find my king; but I was perplexed. for I had no companion. At this moment my own daughter ap- peared, with a certain youth. She was weeping bit- terly.
" 'When aU her tears were shed, she related the seizing by the Bhil chieftain of the prince whom she was carrying when our caravan was shattered, the healing of her hurts by a certain forest-dweller, her peremptory refusal-from disgust at debasing misce- genation-when	he planned to marry her after her re- covery. his resentful attempt to cut off her head in a lonely thicket, the wretch's death at the hands of this chance-met youth, and her own marriage. The youth. when questioned. proved to be an attendant of the
UPAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE 109
king of Videha, detained by a commission and later following the trail.
.. 'The youth and I sought out our master. carry- ing such a report of the little princes as burned his ears and Queen Priyamvada's.	Now a harsh fate or- dained for the king a long war with his eldest brother's sons, in which, after much extremely bitter fighting, he was captured and the queen too became a prisoner. On me lies a curse: old as I am, I cannot lose this for- lorn life, and have. you see, taken to hermit wander- ing; while my daughter, forlornly fiving still. has. you see. actually taken service with Kalpasundari, Vikata- varman's queen. And yet. if the two princes had grown up without accident, they would by now be just attaining such years and looks as yours. Oh, if they were here. the king's kinsmen would not be behaving so impudently.'	And she wept without restraint.
"When I had heard the old woman's story, I too felt a surge of tears, and I confided in her: 'If things stand so. mother, be comforted. In your hour of need did you not beseech a holy man to care for the prince? He took the lad and saw to his rearing. That was a
[	happy inspiration. You wonder why? I am the prince. And I might kill wretched Vikatavarman if I could somehow come at him. But he has it great many younger brothers, and the people of the city side with
I	them; while no man in this land knows me for what I I	am. Why, my own parents would not recognize me. others even less. I must fit a plan to this exigency.'
rIO	THE TEN PRINCES
(fAt my words the old woman embraced me with tears, stroking my head time and again, while her breasts grew moist and she quavered tremulously: 'My dear boy, long life to you! Blessings on you! At last all-blessed fate shows a favoring face. At last Praharavarman	is king in Videha, for at last you are ready with long, strong arm to ferry him over his misery's shoreless sea. Ah, me! Ah, me! How happy Queen Priyamvada	will be!' And in her overwhelming joy she gave me a bath, a meal, and other comforts. That night I lay on a straw mat in the hermitage, re- flecting: 'This enterprise demands chicane. Women are the natural source of chicaneries. Therefore I will get from her the news of the women's side of the house and thus initiate some maneuvre.'
"1 was still reflecting when night retreated, dis- lodged (as it seemed) by the snorting impetuosity of the coursers of the sun that rose from the sea, and rising, made mild weather) as if the day-maker were cooled by his ocean sojourn. 1 left my bed) repeated to the end my morning prayers) and said to my foster- mother: 'Tell me) mother. Have you knowledge of the female court of headstrong Vikatavarman?'	Be- fore the words were out) a woman appeared) at sight of whom myoId nurse cried) in a voice half stifled by tears of joy: 'Pushkarika, my child, this is our mas- ter's son. This is the prince whom 1 heartlessly left in the forest. Thus he comes back to us.'
"Then she, overpowered by overwhelming joy,
UPAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE III
wept copiously and babbled abundantly; and when her spasms were spent) she plunged into court gossip with her mother. To me she said: 'My Prince, Kal- pasundari, daughter of King Kalindavarman of As- sam, surpasses the very nymphs of heaven in accom- plishments and beauty; and she keeps her husband well in hand. Hence Vikatavarman,	for all his numer- ous seraglio, has a single charmer.'
"And 1 replied: 'Take her fragrant garlands from me. Awaken hatred for her husband by reprehending his outrageous infidelities. Stir her self-pity by pictur- ing Vasavadatta and other heroines of romance who had such husbands. Spare no pains to discover and publish the king's flirtations, however secret, with other court ladies; so stiffen her pride.' To my foster- mother I said: 'In the same way you too must drop everything else and keep near the queen. It must be your task to give me a daily report of all that happens there. But your daughter, as I said, if our scheme is to have a sweet, successful ending, must follow Kal- pasundari like a shadow.' And the two women fol- lowed my directions exactly.
"After a few days my foster-mother said: 'My dear son, we have produced and fixed in her such a state of mind that she thinks herself pitiable as a jas- mine vine wedded to a nim tree. What next?' I paint- ed my own likeness and said: 'Take her this. And w?en you have exhibited it and expatiated on it, she will be certain to ask: "Is there any man as good-
112	TIlE TEN PRINCES
looking as this?" And you will answer: "What if there were?" Then you must let me know what she says to tha t.'
"She agreed and visited the court. When she re- turned, she took me aside to report: 'My son, I showed that picture to the adorable queen. She was a picture herself as she pored over it and said: "This world has found its master. For even the god of the blossom-bow does not possess such beauty.	He in this picture is a perfect picture. Nor do I know anybody in the country who could make a thing so perfect. Who pain ted it?"
"'1 smiled and observed: "Your Majesty, it is as you graciously affirm. It is impossible to imagine even the blessed love-god as beingso beautiful. And yet, be- tween sea and sea the world is wide and fate is great. Somewhere even such beauty might be realized. Sup- pose some youth were found, possessing such beauty and other things to match-artistic	gifts, character, scientific attainments, education, style-and suppose he were oflofty birth, what good will he get from it]" "Mother," said she, "what can I answer? Body, heart, life-all	is trivial and unworthy.	So he will get noth- ing. But if this is not an imposition, you must do me
the favor of revealing him as he is, so that my eyes may do what they were made to do."
" 'Then I clinched the matter by stating: "There is such a prince, traveling incognito. At the spring festival he chanced to catch a glimpse of you, playing
UPAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE 113
(like Charm in living flesh and blood) with your friends in the city park. He became a mere mark for the love-gad's arrows and sought me out. His splen- did beauty and yours, the unique attractions of both seemed to belong together; so I was induced long since to wait upon you with gifts from his hands, with
garlands, wreaths, fragrant essences, and the like. With his own hand he painted his own likeness and sent it, to show how deep are his meditations on you. If this matter is settled, nothing is hard for him; he has much more than man's measure of strength, val. or, and wit. I will introduce him this very day. You must grant him a meeting."
" 'She seemed to ponder a little before replying: "Mother, this is no longer much of a secret to you, so I will explain. My dear father felt a great affection for King Praharavarman.	And Queen Priyamvada
was a dear companion of my mother Manavati.	Now these two ladies, before their babies were born, came to an agreement: 'The daughter of whichever has a daughter, shall be given to the son of the one who has a son:	But when I was born and Vikatavarman	asked :or my hand, Father unluckily gave me to him, think-
~ng that	Priyamvada's	son	had	perished.	My	husband IS hard-hearted, unfilial, none too good-looking, gaw_ ky in love-making, fat-headed about poetry, acting, and the arts, conceited .about his courage, a terrible boaster, a liar, and he gives nice things to the wrong
people. This husband doesn't please me much, es-
--------~----------
THE TEN PRlNCES
peciaJly lately. Why, he actually turned his back on
my darling Pushkarika who was right beside him in
the garden, and picked flowers with his own hand
from the little sandal tree that 1 have tended like a
baby, to adorn that girl Ramayantikn,	the girl who
has fastened a jealous rivalry on me, who doesn't
know her place, who always grabs the center of the
stage. And just after I had left it. he amused himself
with her on the jeweled bench in the enclosure on the
pretty little hill. The man is impossible; he begins to
neglect me. Why should I wait? Pain in this life
clogs fear for the next. When a woman's heart has be-
come a quiver for the arrows of the love-god, it is un-
endurable SUffering to be forced to live with someone
she doesn't want. So you must bring me together
with that man today in the jasmine bower in the ga~-
den. Just merely from hearing about him] am terri-
bly in love. And here is a pile of money. With its help
I will set him in the rascal's place and give him my
deep devotion. Then I shall begin to live." I prom-
ised and have returned. My prince must dictate the next step.'
"Then, when I had absorbed from her the details that concerned the terrain of the women's quarters, the disposition of the chamberlains, and the plan ~f the garden; when the sun's disc grew crimson as If blood were shed in the fall from Sunset Peak; when the sky spread dark and wide as if choked by smoke from the sun's coal dying as it sank in the waves of the
UPAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE "5
western sea; when the planet-heralded moon, proud of invading an elder's bed, rose up to enlighten me in my design against another's wife; when the god of the blossom-bow, ambitious to subdue the world, kindled his majesty with the smiling circle of the moon, eager-
ly moving (like the flower-face of Kalpasundari) to behold me, I duly sought my couch. There I fell into meditation:	'This business is as good as done. Yet
"there may be loss of virtue if I approach another's wife, though this is permitted by theologians in cases where both money and love are won. Furthermore, I commit this transgression while combining a design for the release of my parents from bondage; that
should outweigh even this obliquity and leave me a balance, however slender, to virtue's account. And yet-and	yet-when	they learn it, what will Prince
Rajavahana, what will my comrades say?' So I sank into troubled slumber.
"In dream I beheld the blessed god with the ele- phant's head, who said to me: 'Beloved Upaharavur- man, feel no crippling indecision. In you dwells a spark of my spirit, and in that sweet lady the spirit of the goddess of the sacred river, wont to rumple Shiva's matted locks. In an earlier life, when vexed
by my advances, she laid on me the curse of mortality; and I in turn cursed her, saying:	"As here in heaven you bring delight to many, se-e-having become a ~ortal-be	shared by more than one." Yet I added III answer to her plea: "I will myself give you a life's
1I6
THE TEN PRINCES
devotion. yet I shall have one predecessor!' There- fore do not shrink from this enterprise.	It is destined.' I woke with calm joy, and spent the day in the thought of an adventurous meeting with my love, and of what should follow.
"On the next day the love-god, with no change in tactics, showered his shafts upon me. At last the lake of the sun's splendor dried, and muddy darkness grew. Black as that darkness was my cloak, and stout my mail. as, with sword in hand and other trusty ap- purtenances, recalling the landmarks mentioned by my old mother, I drew near the palace moat brim- ming with water. Beside the trench I found a bam- boo pole which Pushkarika	had providently	deposited at the door of her mother's lodge; 1 laid it flat and
crossed the moat; I stood it straight and scaled the wall. I reached the ground within by way of a brick stairway that climbed the height of the entrance gate. Once down, I skirted the row of dilly trees, followed the sandal-tree alley for a little distance, and heard to the north the plaintive cry of pairs of sheldrake birds. So to the north by the trumpet-flower path I felt my way for an estimated arrow's flight along the massive, bulging stucco wall; turned east by the sanded path
with double border of clumps of ashokas and figs; and after a little faced south to enter the mango corridor. "Then I touched the slide of my dark lantern and by its winking light inspected a thick-set bower of jas-
mine vines, sheltering a jeweled bench. On one side of
UPAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE I!7
it I found an inner recess, walled about with rows of young yellow amaranths crowded with bloom, and a door made of red ashoka branches that had fallen to earth, dotted with the fresh glory of blossoming buds, pink with masses of gay Rower dusters.	I opened and
entered. There was a couch thickly strewn with blos- soms, lotus-leaf and dhak..wood receptacles filled with aphrodisiac delights, an ivory-handled fan, a vase holding scented water. I sat down and rested a mo- ment, sniffing the heavy perfume.
"I heard the sound of gentlest feet. At once I left the rendezvous to stand outside, leaning on a red ashoka trunk. The lovely maid crept near-slowly, as if love were cooling-and	not finding me there, was
dreadfully shaken. Like a frantic swan she loosed a quivering cry, sweet with the passion that choked her throat: Too plain! I am deceived. I cannot live. 0 my heart, why deem the impossible possible; then suf- fer such disquiet that it cannot be? 0 blessed archer-
god, how have I sinned against you, that you burn me so, yet do not reduce me to ashes?'
"At this I opened the lantern and stood revealed. And I said: 'My jealous love, you have surely sinned deeply against the love-god, since you mock his very life, his goddess-bride with your beauty, his bow with the curve of your brows, his bee-strung bow-string with. the luster of your dark curls, his shafts with your
dartlllg glances, his saffron-tinted banner of victory with the light of your lips, his foremost friend (the
THE TEN PRINCES
southern breeze) with the breath of your perfumed sigh, his cuckoo with your sweeter song, his staff of flowers with your slender arms, his two bowls filled for the rite of universal conquest with your breasts, his lake of delight with your navel, his victorious chariot with your hips, the twin pillars of his temple's
jeweled archway with your thighs, the flowers that deck his hair with the grace of your feet. The love-god has cause to torment you. But I am unoffending, and he earns blame by torturing me. Be kind, my sweet, give me life with your life-giving glances, for I am stung by the serpent oflove.' And I embraced her. I clasped her close, while her eyes grew wide and soft in a passion of love.
"When she had yielded and when I perceived that her eyes were a little reddened and rolling, that her cheek was overspread with a gentle moisture, that her sweet murmurs were without restraint or coherence, that she bore blushing traces of teeth and nails, that her limbs grew limp as in despair, I relaxed the tension of mind and body, sinking into a state like hers. So severed yet united, we performed love's final ritual, abiding for a time in utter mutual trust, like two who long have known each other's thoughts. Then, with a long and burning sigh, with a somewhat wistful
glance, I timidly stretched out my arms, embraced her gently, and touched her face with a tender kiss. "Her tears started as she lifted lovely hands to her
brow and said: 'Remember, my lord, if you go, my
118
UPAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE
119
life goes too. Take me with you. Else, I am nothing. I have no use save in your service.'
"And J replied: 'My sweet, what man of mind does not exult in a woman's love? If your heart is set on kindness to me, you must follow my instructions with no delay. Secretly show my likeness to the king and say: "Does this figure attain the limit of mascu-
line charm, or does it not?"	And he is certain to say: "It most assuredly does." Then continue: "Well, there is a ce~tain hermit woman who has gained as- surance by foreign travel, a true mother to me. She displayed to me this pictured form and said: '1 know a magic spell by use of which you may assume this form, if first you fast, then on a day of new or full moon, in a sequestered spot, at night, alone, you offer
in a sacrificial fire abandoned by chaplains a hundred
twigs of sandal wood, a hundred twigs of fragrant
aloe, handfuls of camphor, and many silk garments.
Then you must ring a bell. Now if your husband,
summoned by the tinkle of the bell, shall confess to
you his every secret, then close his eyes and embrace
you, this form shall pass to him, while you regain your
former figure. If this plan pleases you and your hus-
band, there must be no deviation from the ritual pre- scribed.'
. '" "If this refiguration commends itself to you, SIr,come to a decision with friends, counselors, young- er brothers, and citizens, and attend the ceremony ap- proved by them." to this he will doubtless assent.
120
THE TEN PRINCES
UPAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE I2J
Well, you can't reckon the power of gems and spells and drugs.' While such gossip went the rounds, when the day of new moon came, when darkness deepened in the advancing hour of twilight, there rose from the garden outside the queen's chambers a column of smoke, empurpled like Shiva's neck. And the smell of sacrifices-e-milk,	ghee, curds, sesame, yellow mustard, suet, flesh, blood-floated	down the breeze and filled the air. And when the smoke suddenly thinned, Ihad entered there.
"Then the stately lady came to the summer-house, embraced me, and said with a smile: 'Rogue, your plan is successful, and that animal is finished. I tempted him in the fashion you taught me, saying: "Deceiver, I will not give you perfect beauty. For with that beauty you will be sought after by heavenly nymphs, not to mention women. And you are giddy as a bee. There is no telling where one so heartless would alight." He fell at my feet and said: "Beloved,
forgive my knaveries. Hereafter I would not notice another woman, even mentally. Hasten to fulfil your promise."
" 'So I have come to you in this wedding dress. At first. this wife was given you by love as priest, with passion's flame for witness; with this holy fire as wit- ness, she is given again by her own heart.'	And tiptoe on my instep, she clasped my neck with two arms like graceful vines while the tender intertwining fingers figured interlacing leaves, sweetly lifted her face-
Then, when with due ritual the priest has pacified the sacrificial victim where the paths cross in this very garden. and when the fire is abandoned, I will enter under cover of the smoke and take my stand in this same bower. But when twilight darkens. you will whisper with a humorous smile to Vikatavarman: "You are a deceiver, and ungrateful.	In the very fig- ure gained by my favor, a figure that makes holiday
for the eyes of the world, you plan to entertain my jealous rivals. For my part, I would not raise a vam- pire to my own destruction."	Then you must seek me
secretly, reporting what answer he makes. There- after, I shall know what to do. And see that Pushka- rika obliterates my footprints in the garden.' She agreed, reverencing my words like a lesson in Scrip- ture; still athirst with desire, she crept to her chamber. And I went as I had come, and sought my own dwell-
mg. "So the adorable lady played her part, and the
rogue followed her leading.	And the news of a miracle to be went buzzing among the citizens: 'Have you heard? By virtue of a magic spell of the queen's, King Vikatavarman	is going to get a figure fit for a god. I don't think this trickery is exactly religious. And how about a possible miscalculation? They say the queen herself will do the job in the garden outside her own chamber. Yes, even the counselors have discussed
and approved, and they are wise as the professor in heaven. If it works, it is the biggest miracle ever.
122	THE TEN PRINCES
a flower-face willingly lifted-and with wild, wide glances kissed me again and again.
"Then I said: 'Stay right here among the ama- ranth clusters, while I go forth to finish what must be finished.' So I left her, approached the sacrificial fire, and rang the bell which hung from an ashoka bough, while she warbled, enticing our enemy like a minister of fate. And I proceeded to offer in the fire the aloe,
the sandal, and the rest. "The king drew near the appointed spot; and when
I perceived that a measure of doubt and amazement laid hold on him as he stood, I said: 'Tell me the truth once more, calling this sacred fire to witness. I will dower you with this beauty, if you will not use it to make love to my rivals.' Then a dear confidence arose in him that this was no chicanery, but the queen herself; and he prepared to swear an oath.
"But I smiled and said: 'Why swear? What mor- tal woman can supplant me? And if you can win the love of nymphs, then do so. But tell me your secrets. When they are fully told, the old, accustomed form will drop from you:
"And he confessed: 'I hold in bondage my father's younger brother Praharavarman.	With my counse- lors I have resolved to poison him and proclaim his death by indigestion. To my younger brother Vishala- varman I have planned to give an army division for an assault on the Pundra country. A leading citizen
from Panchala and a trader in my protection have
UPAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE IZ3
quietly advised me that a certain diamond worth the wide world, can be had for next to nothing from a Greek named Khanati.	And a householder of my in- timate acquaintance,	a leader in his district, one Sha-
tahali, has come to employ-for	my advantage-cer- tain army generals in an expedition to destroy by pop- ular rioting that liar, that boaster, that rascally parti- san Anantasira.	Such are my secret plans for the moment.'
"Having listened, I said to him: 'Your life is done. Receive the reward that fits your conduct,' and bisect- ed him with my knife.	I flung the divided body into the handy fire that was blazing high with sacrificial butter, and there it was consumed. Then I comforted my heart's dearest, who showed some womanish dis-
tress; went, holding her flower-hand, to her chambers; with her permission summoned all the ladies. and straightway paid them my respects. After brief and pleasant conversation with these astonished ladies. I dismissed them all; then. clasping close my bride, spent a night that seemed too short. And from her lips I learned the character of the court.
"At dawn I bathed. repeated my prayers. and met my counselors, to whom I said: 'Gentlemen, my na- ture has changed with my form. The father whom I thought to poison. must be released and reinstated ,in this kingdom, which is his. We must show him filial obedience. There is no guilt like parricide.'
"I also summoned my brother Vishalavarman and
THE TEN PRINCES
said: 'My dear, the Pundras are at present impecu- nious. If smitten by the blind madness of resentment, they might so forget themselves as to assail our realm. which is prosperous. Therefore postpone your campaign until failure of seed grain or ripened crops. For the moment a military movement is ill-advised.'
"To the two prominent citizens I said: '1 should lose virtue if I acquired a great treasure for no true equivalent, so pay its just price.'
"Next I summoned the district leader Shatahali and explained: 'It was planned to destroy Ananta- sira as being a partisan of Praharavarman.	'Why kill him now that my father is reinstated? Make no fur- ther move in this affair.' So they, recognizing every detail as squaring with their secret knowledge, were convinced of my identity; bestowed astonished praise upon me and the queen; released my parents from confinement; and restored their kingdom. And after I had secretly conveyed a complete account of my procedure through the old nurse, my parents climbed
t~e dim.ax of delight when I fell at their feet, and gra- clo~~ly.Invested ~.e with the dignity of crown prince.
Wirh my spmt thus at rest, I had experience of pleasu,res embittered by the pain of separation from my prmce, when presently I learned from a dispatch of my father's friend Simhavarman that Chandavar- man was assaulting Champa; and realizing that aid to. friends is no less incumbent than slaughter of ene- mres, I started with a considerable force stripped for
UPAHARAVARMAN'S ADVENTURE 125
quick service. In so doing, I was heaped with cumu- lative holiday rejoicing, for I perceived the glory of my revered prince."
When he had heard this story, Prince Rajavahana smiled and said: "See now! The invasion of another's bed, effected by chicane at that, yet undertaken to re- lease parents from the pains of bondage, enacted by annihilation of a wicked enemy. resulting in the ac- quisition of a kingdom, has brought the happiest con- sequences, both in money and virtue. What enter- prise, indeed, of the intelligent fails to show a fair is- sud"	Then, fixing a long and loving glance on Artha- pala's face, he bade him relate his adventure. The latter bowed and began.
I
I
CHAPTER IX ARTHAPALA'S	ADVENTURE
"I too, Your Majesty, intent on the same purpose as these friends, wandered the circle of the lands bounded by the billow-garlanded sea and came one day to the city of Kashi, to Benares. When I had bathed in the sacred pool whose waters are limpid as a fractured gem, when I had reverently worshiped Ben- ares' lord, the ever-blessed Shive, I wandered still un- til I met an elongated fellow with sturdy arms like bars of iron, with loin cloth tightly girt, with eyes swollen and red from ceaseless weeping. And I reflect- ed: 'This is a rough specimen, yet his eye shines dim through showers of misery and his habitude betokens desperation. The poor man is clearly careless of life and is about to meet some calamity rooted in the suf- fering of one he loves. I will ask him whether friendly service is possible, even from me.'
"So I approached and said: 'My dear sir, these reg- imentals hint despair. If it is no secret, I could wish to learn the source of your sorrow.' He inspected me respectfully, then said: 'What harm? Listen'; and seated with me beneath an oleander, he told his tale.
" 'My good sir, my name is Purnabhadra.	I am a householder's son, but hung loose on society in the East. Though carefully reared by my father, I obeyed
",
7
128	THE TEN PRINCES
the call of fate and made a profession of thievery. Now in this city of Kashi, while stealing in the house of an eminent business man,"] was caught with the coin and fettered. I was condemned to die and the signal was given by the chief counselor, Kamapala, who looked on from the height of the palace entrance- gate; whereupon a must elephant called Death-win-
ner, to whom murder was sport, lumbered toward me with monstrous trunk curled back, while the jangling of his bells was reinforced by throaty yells from the crowd.
"'As he charged, I scolded him defiantly; as he aimed a glancing blow with his tusk, I thrust two stout arms into a perforated stick of wood and scrubbed his mouth; he seemed dismayed and turned. The infuriated driver headed him back with blistering words and kicks of unrestrained ferocity. Again with double rage I scolded and thumped until he turned and trotted off. Then, when I followed with boister- ous abuse, the rabid driver screamed: "I'll kill you, you damned dummy of an elephant!" pounded the creature time and again with a sharp goad at the cor- ner of the eye, and contrived to make him face me.
« • "Take away this wormy animall" I shouted. "Bring on a real elephant.	I should like a moment's sport before I go my destined way." And when the beast saw me bellowing like mad, he disregarded the driver's stern persuasions and bolted. Then the coun- selor summoned me and said: "My good man, this
1
J
ARTHAPALA'S ADVENTURE
beast is death in the flesh; Death-winner is his name; murder is his sport.	In spite of all, you have mastered him. Now if you abandoned your degrading profes- sion, could you earn an honest living in our service?" "Yes, sir," I said; and he became a friend.
" 'One day I made quiet inquiries, and he confided his history to me: "In Blossom City lived Dharma- pala, counselor of a victorious monarch, famed for pru- dence and sacred learning. His son Sumitra emulated the father in the prudential virtues. I am Sumitra's younger brother, but by another mother. My father, being conventional, tried to curb my dalliance with the gay girls, but my naughtiness was ineradicable. So I left home and wandered to the ends of the earth. In this city of Benares I visited a garden in order to worship Love's chastiser, Shiva, and there 'I chanced to behold Kan timati, daughter of King Chandasimha of Benares, playing ball with girl friends. I loved her, contrived to become acquainted, and secretly enjoyed her society in the palace. She became pregnant by me
and bore a son. " • "The child seemed stillborn; lest the secret be
let slip, a servant bid the body on a mound in the gar- den, whence a Bhil woman conveyed it to the grave- yard. But as she returned by the highway at night, she was seized by policemen, was menaced with tor- tures, and in her fright she half revealed the secret. By order of the king she pointed me out as I slept se- curely at night in a recess beneath the mound in the
'3°
THE TEN PRINCES
ARTHAPALA'S ADVENTURE
'3'
garden; I was tied with adequate cords, was taken to the graveyard, and was on the point of perishing be- neath a sword held aloft by a headsman.	But through fate's power I burst my bonds, seized the sword, killed that proletarian and a few others, and made my es- cape.
" , "As I wandered helpless in the forest, I was ap- proached one day by a maiden with her maidservant. Her beauty was heavenly, but she was weeping. Her lifted flower-hands sweetly framed her face, her curls played gaily round her cheeks as she bowed and sat
with me in the cool shade of a mighty forest banyan tree; and when I eagerly inquired:	'Who are you, my soul? Whence come you? For what cause do you show favor to my poor person?' her answer was un- stinted honey: 'Sir, I am the daughter of Manibha- dra, a lord of the Yaksha demigods, and my name is Taravali. On one occasion, as I returned from Mala-
bar, where I had paid homage to Lopamudra,	the sage Agastya's wife, I found a crying baby boy in a Ben- ares graveyard. I took him and loved him so that I carried him to my parents, and my father carried him to the palace hall of our god and king, Kubera, who summoned me and asked: "Maiden, what is your feeling toward this boy?" "Such tender love for this
tender love," I replied, "as if he were a child of my body!'	"The poor girl is right," said he and related a terrific tale that related to the baby .
.. • " 'Of the complicated detail I grasped only this
/, I
-that	you are Shaunaka and Shudraka and Kama- pala, the same man in diverse incarnations; that Bandhumati and Vinayavati and Kantimati are the same woman; that Vedimati, Aryadasi, Somadevi are one and the same; that Hansavali, Shurasena, and Sulochana are not different persons; that Nandini, Rangapataka, and Indrasena are identical.
.. '" 'Now the herdsman's daughter whom you married when you were Shaunaka, was Aryadasi then, but today myself, Taravali. And the boy, when you were Shudraka, was born to me (Aryadasi in that in- carnation) but reared by Vinayavati out of love per- sisting subliminally. To her, in her present life as
Kantimati, the same child has been born. Thus fate snatched him from the jaws of many deaths and let me have him; and I, obeying the god's command, gave him to Vasumati, queen of Rajahansa who :vas then enduring hardships in the jungle, that he mIght serve her son Rajavahana, world-emperor to be. Thereafter, graciously dismissed by those whose word I honor, I came, by destiny's devious device, to bow low at the lotus-feet of one whom death has mouthed
and dropped.' " , "On hearing this, I repeatedly embraced r:'Y
love of many lives, consoling her over and ~ver while happy tears rolled down my cheeks; then III a great palace which her divine power revealed, I reveled day and night in such delights as earth can hardly know.
... "After two or three days I said to my adorable
132	TIlE TEN PRINCES
lady: 'My dear, I wish to repay a wrong: I wish to enjoy the pleasure of vengeance upon Chandasimha, who threatened my life.' And she replied with a smile: 'Come, dear. I will take you-to	see Kanti- mati.' So at midnight I was taken to the king's pal- ace. There I held a naked sword at his throat, awakened him, and while he shuddered, said: 'I am your son-in-law. Without permission from you I ap- proached your daughter. I have come to wipe out that transgression by showing an interest in you.' Fearfully frightened, he groveled, saying: 'The trans- gression is mine. I was a fool. When you did me the honor of meeting my daughter, I broke all bounds like a lunatic and decreed your death. From this mo- ment,' said he, 'Kantimati is at your disposal, and this kingdom, and my life, of course.' The next day he assembled all his counselors and gave me his daughter's hand with due ceremony. So Taravali told Kantimati the story of her son, and the tale of their former lives to Somadevi, Sulochana, and Indrasena.
In this fashion I pass, indeed, as counselor, but am in
i
ARTIIAPALA'S	ADVENTURE	IJj
worthy man anointed Prince Simhaghosha, :t lad of somefive years, and gave him fitting education.	But the boy has the quick passions of youth ; and cerratn cronies of	slander-loving	handaghoshn	have	trapped him.saying: "That snake violated your ister, After. ward, while the king slept, he lifted 3 sword to k.i.ll him. The king, scarcely awake, was frightenro into compliance and gave his daughter.	Then he poir.oned the king's eldest heir Chandaghoshn, and at (hi moment is using you, whom he thinks a helpl	bo,. as a figurehead to lull suspicion in the people; but presently he will make way with you-he	is quite w- lous. So strive to send him to the death-god's Oty." Though ~hus corrup~ed, the boy was unable, from fur of the fairy Taravali, to do him an injury.
"'In these same days the queen dowager ula. ksh~na,observing	an	alteration	in	the	bea.ring ofKanti.
fact crown prince, and spend gay days with gayest	~I ladies."
In your flower-face." And she replied: "Madl.fll yourecallthatIeverplayedfastandlooseW'~L' 1
.. 'So he lived, the one sure friend of everybody, constant in kindness even to a creature like me. And when an intestinal disorder took his father-in-law to heaven-c-rhe queen's eldest brother Chandaghosha having previously tapered to annihilation in conse- quence of excessive attachment to women-the
u.: ahIfA .) I;UawayIn
jI
to her bel	ed bo	h	ISi'Cted ov	Y, w 0 now forgets his fear. While:
mati. ~a~.e affectionate inquiry. "Your Majeuy," sh,esaid, you cannot play fast and loose with me. ?IV me the true explanation	of the recent alterati
e c:
Mf d'	un)"OU y Men and fellow-wife Tnravaf is grumpy bea.
our husband,	when	alone	with	her,	blunderingly
my name to her; she disdained my fondn	&h
Scornedmy submissive	courtesy	she flounc--I	•	C
urr. nd Our husband IS depressed H melancholy." The pith of this Sulaksha.~a weh~cemy
134	THE TEN PRINCES
Kamapala betrayed the pain of separation in features jaundiced by longing for his love, in eyes dimmed by tears that manhood would not shed, in somewhat sap- less speech turned arid (as it seemed) by burning sighs, while he could hardly perform his functions at court, the boy had him seized and fettered by conspir- ators. His imputed crimes are trumpeted from place to place. and his eyes are to be torn out with such sav- agery that death may ensue. This is why I stand alone and weep my fill; this is why I gird my loins and
long to die in that most generous presence.' "Now when I learned my father's perilous plight. I said in a rush of tears: 'My honest friend, why hide the truth from you? I am that son of his whom the
Yaksha lady gave in pledge to Queen Vasumati, that
he might humbly serve Prince Rajavahana.	I feel in
me the power to kill a thousand hirelings with uplifted
weapons in order to rescue my father.	Yet if one man,
during the scuffle, should sink a knife in his body,
then all my effort would be but an offering in dead ashes.'
"Before the words were out, a great snake raised his head through a hole in the wall. I charmed him and drugged him and caught him, then said to Pur- nabhadra:	'Dear friend, our end is gained. Unnoticed in the scuffle, I will let this fellow drop and will make him bite Father, but will arrest the poisoning process
ARTHAPALA'S ADVENTURE
135
justatthepointwherehewillbeleftfordead.Mean- 1Vbilet~hrong,JUStbelowmetheyhaltedhim while, you must fearlessly enlighten my mother, say-	'Thisis~ar:dsman thrice made this proclanUltion:
pala, the COunselor. Coveting the kin ...
ing: ''Your son whom the Y ksha Indy entru ted (0 Queen Vasumati in the forest, has returned, hu learned his {ather's plight from me, and will use hi ~it to do thus and so.	ow you mu t overcome )"OUf diffidence and send this petition to the king: 'It i doubtless a ~arrior's dury to chastise a scoundrel,
:vhether relatlve Or not, without	compunction;	but it
IS a woman's duty to follow the fate of her husband 'whetherscoundrelor not.	Therefore	I sha.lI mount	th~ pyre with him. Pray authorize the final rite that be-
fitsa young woman.' And he will certainly gnu\[ thi request. ~hen you must convey your husband to hi Owndwelling and lay him on a bed of acred grass in an unf~equented COrner screened	by II curtain,	while: youWalt near by in the COStume or a. wife who folio
her husband in death	Prese	t1y I	'II	'	,	h ..n W1arnve10te
O,uterCOurtand will be admitted	by you.	1 wiU resus-
CItateFather, and we will follow his recommendation
~ltolsbubsequent.ction,'"	The fellow ag....,.j and joy. u y	u,cled off,
,indUAtthe place of proclamation treeWiththo k	.
I climbed
a tam._
den hil	rc , spreading branches, and lay hid. cou;d~nld~:he t:awd sought the highest IPO~ the gen. rhe~ nd hIgh and low their chattering bun be- bound 11 my father w.. brought forth, his IrltU gabblinI thr thlers behind his back, the center or a
THE TEN PRINCES
~om, he clandestinely poisoned his sovereign Chanda- simha and the heir apparent, Chandaghosha. Fur. ther, he plotted evil against our present monarch Simhaghosha, who now comes to years of discretion. He confidentially summoned to a secret interview the counselor Shivanaga, likewise Sthuna and Angaravar- sha, and babbled of royal murder. These loyal men
rep~r~ed the plot, and the judge decreed deprivation ~fVISIonasthelegalpenalty forthiskingdom-covet- mg Brahman.	He is now on his way to have his eyes torn out. And if any second criminal be detected His M.ajesty will in like manner visit upon him the a~pro- pnate penalty.'
"While the crowd cheered this announcement , I dropped the snake-whose	hood swelled wickedly- on my father. Then 1jumped down as if terrified' es- c~ped iden tification in the throng; and when the vi- CIOUS serpent stung my father, 1 quickly checked the
venom's effect, saving his life, though he seemed dead as he sank to the ground. 'It is a fact' I cried .that chastisement from heaven falls on him wh~ s~orns his king. The sovereign planned to take his slght-fate	takes his life.' Some approved my dic- tum, but others carped; while the snake bit the heads- ~an too and left the scene; for the frightened crowd
dispersed and made way for him. "Then my mother, learning the facts from Pur-
nabhadra, displayed peculiar self-possession even in face of such an exigency: accompanied by servants of
ARTHAPALA'S ADVENTURE	137
the family, she boldly came on foot, sat holding my father's head in her lap, and made this request of the king: 'This is my husband; whether guilty or not guilty toward you, heaven only knows. That specula- tion is profitless to me. But he held my hand in mar- riage; 1 should bring dishonor on your family, should 1 abandon him. Pray permit me to mount the pyre with my dear lord.' This proposal delighted the ~v- ereign, who decreed: 'Let there be rites consonan: W1t~ family dignity. After their celebration, let my sister s husband experience the ultimate sacrament.'
"Now the headsman departed this life because I
prevented every application of medical ma~icj and
when 1 pointed out that Kamapala had been bitten b.y
the same cobra, the king permitted transference to his
own dwelling for a funeral eulogy. So my fathe~ was
brought home and laid on a bed of sacred grass 1U an
unfrequented corner. Then my mother do~ned .her
death-vestments, bade her friends a pathetic adieu,
paid lingering worship to the house divinities, earnest-
ly repressed the servants' lamentations, and entered
alone where stood my father's bed. There she beheld
her husband sound and well. for I had previously been
.	d	d h d neutralized the admitted by Purnabha ra an a
poison.	rh h "With the gushing tears of supreme de Ig. t S ~
fell at her husband's feet; then hugged "" ,ajgambban
.	.	. t ndJoyfu so mg agalU, while her breasts grew mots a	.
.	.	h: 'Myson Iwickedly struggled WI th stammering speec .	,
'38	THE TEN PRlNCES
deserted you the moment you were born. I was heart- less to you; how can you be so kind to me? Ah, but y?ur father did no wrong; you were right to snatch him from the jaws of death. Still Taravali has no
ARTHAPALA'S ADVENTURE	'39
to effort subjects, enemies, and hereditary foes; and will extirpate this intractable king.' 'So be it. I see no objection,' said I, approving Father's plan.	.
"while we stood thus on the defensive, the king learned the story with qualms of self-reproach and ap- plied various offensive maneuvres,	which we coun- tered day by day. In this posture of affairs I di~co~- ered through Purnabhadra	the location of the k!ng s sleeping quarters and at once dug a tunnel With a snake's-head spade, starting from the "cor~er of ,th~ wall of our own dwelling and debouchmg 10 a girls dormitory, a regular heaven on earth, where the womenfolk were flustered on beholding me. One maiden among them seemed the crescent moon, dis-
concerting with her loveliness the dark of the under- world; or the earth-goddess in living flesh and blood; or Shiva's bride descending to vanquish demons; or the blessed love-gad's love sojourning in the world be- low; or kingly glory hiding in a hole to escape the sight of so many unworthy kings; or an image of bur- nished gold, dazzling in splendor, She trembled be- fore me like a sandal sapling before the southern
breeze. "In this company of ladies, constituted as de-
~r
J ee mg ; she really received you from the god Kubera
and gave.you to Queen Vasurnari, did not give you to meN .
•	0, It was quite natural.	I was not good enough.
Such a heap of luck it would be if a wretch like me
could drink in the nectar of your baby-talk. Come,
embrace me I' And aoai	. . n again and again she stroked my
head, drew me to her lap. scolded Taravali, hugged me, drenched me with tears; her slender body quiv- ered, and for a time she seemed another woman.
"My father also, lifted from hell to heaven from
woe so bitter to happiness so complete extracted
every detail of the story from Purnabhadra	and
c?unted himself more blest than heaven's blessed
ktn~. But when I had given a brief account of myself, I said-for	my pa	t	I··	d
•	«y paren s were ost In JOYand won er: ,You must give orders for our future Course of action.'
My d~ar son; said my father, 'this house of ours is
walled In an extensiv	.	."..	ibl .	e CIrCUIt,It ISan inexhausti
ere- Mposltoroyf weapons, and its defenses are unassailable.
oreover	many'	d	.	. ,	reu atones are under obligation to
.	·1 hai d chaperon-she scribed, there was a s: ver- aire	r II
me, and a majority	f h	.. ,	0 t e Citizens do not approve my
. bl	'	rass-who Ie seemed a stalk of the white-	oommg g
degradation	Besid	I h d'	. eSI es, ave some thousands of sol-
. imid dei " . 'Pray grant at my feet and said With tim!	eJectlon.
ters, with friend	d . s, sons, an Wives. So let us hold our
men and have us a guaranty of safety, for we are wo	l
ground for a few d	." d.	ays, stlrnng passions foreign and
,	athirst for com- no other recourse. Are you a prlOce,
omesttc W "11di	h .	e WI	irect t ese passions; will instigate
.
THE TEN PRINCES
bat with devils, eager to enter hell? Pray tell us your name and the cause of your coming.'
«And I replied: 'Ladies, feel no fear. I am Artha- pala, son of the distinguished Brahman Kamapala and of Queen Kantimati.	For good and sufficient rea- sons I was threading a tunnel connecting my house with the palace and, in so doing, encountered you. Tell me,' said I, 'who you are and how you come to dwell here.'
"The old lady lifted her hands and spoke: 'Blest are we, my prince, that these eyes see you safe. Lis- ten. To Chandasimha, your mother's father, Queen Lilavati bore two children, Chandaghosha and Kan- timati. Now Chandaghosha, the heir apparent, was excessively attached to women; consequently he faded away and went to heaven during the pregnancy of his queen Acharavati, who later gave birth to a daughter, the maiden here present, Manikarnika. But the pangs of labor slew her, and she followed her husband. Then King Chandasimha summoned me se- cretly and issued orders, thus: "Riddhimati, this maiden shows the signs of future fortune. Hence] plan to educate her properly and give her to Darpa- sara, heir of the monarch of Malwa. Yet I feel some fear, derived from the doings of Kantimati, as to the public acknowledgment of nubile maidens. You there- fore (with generous assistance) are to rear her in a great subterranean dwelling, which 1 have con- structed, to baffle my enemies, in the recesses of an
ARTHAPALA'S ADVENTURE
artificial hill, providing it with numerous rooms for social and theatrical use. It contains supplies that you could not exhaust in a hundred years." Hereupon in the double thickness of the wall of his own apart- ment he shot back a panel for a cubit's breadth and through the opening compelled us to enter this place, where we have seen the passing of twelve years and where this girl has grown from child to woman. Mean- while, the king has quite forgotten. By her grand- father, it is true, this maiden was destined to Darpa- sara; but before her birth, your mother Kantimati won her in a game of chance, so that her own mother
promised her as wife to you. Hence you alone, my prince, should plan what is proper.'
"And I rejoined: 'I must first finish a small job in the palace; then 1 will return and do what is right by you.' So 1 followed a passage which they lighted, shot the panel, entered the chamber where Simhaghos~a slept securely at dead of night, and captured him alive. Like the king of birds with a snake, 1 clutched and bore my wriggling prey through that same h?le in the wall into the presence of the ladies. 1 took hlJ~ home fastened his feet with fetters of iron, and prl- vately exhibited him to my parents, his face dirty from measuring the dwelling, his eyes reddened by copious tears; and 1 told the story of the secret pas- sage.
"My parents, overjoyed, multipli.e~ his fetter~- for they were alert to his evil disposltlon-and	With
THE TEN PRINCES
all due ceremony bestowed the damsel's hand upon me. The kingdom lacked a lord and fell to us. My mother suggested the liberation of Simhaghosha, but we dreaded sedition and kept him a prisoner. Such was our situation when the Anga king, Simhavarman, was assailed by enemies; and we, aware of his devoted loyalty to you, sir, marched to his relief. Thus I was
honored by sprinklings of dust from your lotus-feet. And now let Simhaghosha, though all unworthy, cleanse himself of all his trespasses by propitiatory prostration at your feet." And Arthapala raised his hands and bowed.
Then Prince Rajavahana spoke: «Great valor, and great ingenuity of design! Let your kinsman be liber- ated and brought before me." He turned to Pramati, saying with an affectionate smile: "We now await
•
your
ad ven ture."
He bowed and told this tale. "Your Majesty, when widely wandering in search of you, lance came to a halt beneath a lordly, sky-scraping tree that grew on Vindhya's side. Since still the declining sun, like a spray of blossoms, adorned the brow of the
West, I bathed in the waters of a pool; then paid homage to the twilightjwhile darkness slowly leveled gulch and hill. To make a bed, I strewed the ground with flowering twigs; then lifted my hands and prayed:
'May the resident divinity of this tree be my refuge as I sleep unguarded in this wild wood, fierce with its hosts of murderous prowlers, with its deep caves puffed with floods of nocturnal darkness black as Shive's neck: And I lay down, pillowing my head on
my left arm. "A moment later, my limbs were strangely thrill-
ing to such felicity as earth can hardly show, my senses were steeped in ecstasy, my soul was filled ,:ith life and joy, my hair was rapturously erect, my rIght arm throbbing	auspiciously.	I slowly opened won~er- ing eyes to behold above me an awning of dazzling
silk, that seemed a beam of the spotless moon. Glanc- ing toward the left, I observed gay couches along a -mortared	wall, where	women	most	securely	slept.
CHAPTER X PRAMATI'S ADVENTURE
'44
THE TEN PRINCES
PRAMATI'S ADVENTURE	'45
her cheek, dotted with pearls of weariness, seems a ) mango fruit, white and ripe, dappled with drops of sap that dripped from the broken stem; for her breath comes panting, fired by her new-won womanhood; the i pigment pales on her breast; her garments show the soil of use. She must be mortal womanf'Yet -:ne;;:ven
be praised l-cher youth is virgin: forner limbs are sup- ple, though rich in feminine grace; her complexion, though winsome exceedingly, is interwoven with pal- lor; her face has nothing florid, a stranger to the pres- sure of remorse; her lip is a jewel, clear as coral; her firmly modeled cheek is not too rounded nor too red, but like the petal of a champak bud; she sleeps in sweet security, free from fear of shafts of love; her breast is innocent of passion's pitiless deformation; and I, whose heart respects the bounds of righteous- ness-v-I love her. But if my love is fully shown in an embrace, she will surely wake with a scream. Yet, not embracing her, I shall never sleep again. Well, come what may, I will put fortune to the test.' So I
touched her gently, but myself feigned sleep, in a strange commingling of passion and timidity.
"A curious tremor shook her. Though her left side thrilled with pleasure, the slow beginnings of a yawn left her limbs languid. The lifting lashes quivered over half-opened eyes still dimmed by weariness, the perfect charm of her girlish glance subdued by un- completed sleep. Stirred by miracle-wo:ki~g I~ve, ~er shy states of feeling shifted (but descrrpuon IS vain)
Turning to the right, I perceived a single maiden, who
lay on a bed white as a mass of nectar foam. The $'•
finely woven ihift slipped from her bosom; to her per- son clung clustered light like the tusk of the primal boar; loose on her shoulder hung a silken robe that re- called the sea of milk: she seemed the earth-goddess, fainting with fear. With the breath of sighs that caused red rays of light to ripple gaily round her blos- som-lip, sighs that were laden with fragrance from her flower-face, she seemed to fan the dying spark of love slain by the deadly fire of Shive's eye; the lovely eyes were closed, the face asleep, as when imprisoned bees
lie slumbering in the folded lily's cup. She seemed a jeweled vine from the wishing-tree in Paradise,
plucked by the arrogant elephant of heaven, and
tossed to earth. .,...r	"And I reflected: 'What has become of the wild
forest? And how is it replaced by this massive palace that towers like the war-god's sharp-pronged lance- and grazes the empyrean vault? What has become of the flowery bed strewn on the forest floor? And how is it replaced by this couch of swan's-down and silk, brilliant as moon-rays massed? Who are these lovely sleepers, calm as a bevy of nymphs that have swooned on falling from swings whose cords are made of moon- beams? And who is she of the lotus-hands, who lies like a goddess on a bed of silk spotless as the full mOon ~f autumn? No goddess can she be, for she shrinks like a lotus-cluster at the soft caress of moonlight; for
THE TEN PRINCES
being compounded of fright and wonder and joy and passion and apprehension and gayety and woman's wish to charm. >(fhe voice that strove to wake her maidens, the heart that was yielding to assaulting	I love, the limbs on which her agitation issued as pearls
of moisture-these	with a mighty effort she held to their .service. o/Sweetly peeping, her eager eyes marched to slow reconnaissance of my person. She raised her head and shoulders, yet still lay timidly up- on the bed.
"For all my depth of love, a drowsiness overcame me; I know not how. My body suffered sensations of discomfort, and I awoJie. Awake, I saw before me the same wild forest, the same great tree, the same couch of leaves. And nighttgrew light with dawn. And in my mind was fixed this mystery and purpose: 'Was it dream? Hallucination? Illusion sent by devils or by gods? Come what may, I will not leave this bed of earth until I know the truth. While life persists, I will lie down beside this goddess.'
"A woman appeared before me. Her slender figure drooped like a chaplet of lilies scorched by the rays of the sun; her robe was travel stained. Her lips, stran- gers to rouge and showing pale, their luster fading under burning sighs, seemed to be spouting dusky smoke from the gloomy fire of separated love; her eyes were reddened, as if unceasing streams of weeping had drained them, leaving only blood behind. With her abundant hair plaited in a single braid and fluttering-
PRAMATI'S ADVENTURE
.only within the bonds of chaste decorum, with her black hood of a fabric finely woven but tattered, she seemed the animate banner of wifely fidelity. Though sadly wasted, she retained, through heavenly inter- vention, some freshness of color.
"I fell at her feet. Two graceful arms that quiv- ered with joy helped me to rise. She embraced me as a son, stroked my head; and the milk of tender af- fection flowed from her breasts; tears less scalding choked her utterance asshe lovingly stammered: 'My dear, my dear! Did Vasumati, queen of Magadha's monarch, tell you how Manibhadra's daughter, Tara- vali, delivered to her hand the baby Arthapala and disappeared after narrating a strange tale learned from the god Kubera and relating to herself, her hus- band, her son, and her friends? Well, I am Taravali, the mother of you boys. Vexed with unreasoning pique, I flounced away from the protecting care
of your father Kamapala, son of Dharmapala and younger brother of Sumantra. Penitent and lonely, I Was visited in a vision by a goblin-like c;reature who laid a curse on me, saying: "You are jealous. That you may suffer a full year of loneliness, I will possess you." And even as he spoke, I awoke, imp-ridden. That year is gone, long as a thousand years. Last night, having learned of a festive assembly summoned in Shravasti by Shiva, god of gods, and seeing my kinsfolk convoked from every quarter, I started, curse-free, to seek my husband's side; at that moment
--~-----
----
--
,...., ---~-
THE TEN PRINCES
you arrived and fell asleep with the prayer: "May the resident divinity be my refuge." Still clogged by the cruel curse, I did not at the moment fully recognize you, yet realized that I could not abandon a suppliant to the unending hazards of this wild wood; I therefore took you with me as you slept.
" 'But when I drew near the hall where gods were gathered, I reflected that I could not attend the divine assembly in company of a mortal youth. Just then I chanced to perceive Navamalika, daughter of Shra- vasti's sovereign who is deservedly named Dharma- vardhana, Virtue's Extender. She lay, for relief from summer heat, on a soft and spacious couch upon the
PRAMATI'S ADVENTURE	149
.	' Ignorance indeed, I have been heartlessly indifferent.
palace balcony, and I thought: "Thank heaven! She slumbers, and her maidens are deep in sleep. This princely Brahman may rest here a mere moment until I return, my duty done"; and I laid you there to rest while I sought my destination.
,
For now his love is fixed upon her, and the maiden loves the youth. Yet both feign sleep and-whether from shyness or alarm-do	not communicate their feeling. And I must go, while still this maiden, breathed upon by love, preserves her secret unimpart- ed to friend or waiting-maid. For the moment I re- mo,:"ethe prince, that he may later create his oppor- tumty, find fit means, and gain his goal:' So I used my power to plunge you into slumber, and returned you to this leafy bed. Such is the truth. Now I
would seek your father's kindness:	And as I bowed, s~e embraced me time and again, stroked my head, kissed me on both cheeks, and departed, faint with affection. Then I, a slave to love, turned my face to Shravasri.
"On the journey 1 came to a large market town, where business men were raising a tremendous bom- bilation over a cockfight, so that 1 could not repress a snicker as I joined them. And a certain Brahman who sat near me, a gay old gentleman, quietly asked an explanation of my merriment. 'How in the world,' said I, 'can men be such fatheads as to match Crane, that cock in the western pen, against Cocoanut, the rooster in the eastern pen? Cocoanut outclasses him.' 'Be still,' said the wise old boy. 'Don't give these nin- nies a tip,' and he handed me some betel gum (cam-
" 'When I had inspected the splendid festival, had felt the comfort of converse with my own people, and had shown veneration for the lord of the triple uni- verse with a diffidence enhanced by consciousness of my own transgression, I paid homage to the blessed mother, the mountain's daughter, Shiva's devoted goddess-bride, who favored me with the smiling words: "No more fear, my dear. Now abide at your
husband's side. The curse is over-past;" " 'At once my self-possession was restored. I re-
turned, and seeing you, knew you for what you are.
'~See," I said, "this is the friend and very life of dar- ling Arthapala: this is my son Pramati to whom in
•
THE TEN PRJNCES
phor flavor) from his little box, filling in the intermis- sion with spicy anecdotes. Then the two birds went at each other full tilt, stab and counterstab, with wing-flapping and defiant cock-a-doodling. And the
poor cock from the western pen was beaten. The old gentleman) delighted at backing a winner, made a friend of me in spite of the disparity in age; gave me a bath, food, and other comforts in his own house that day; and when I started next morning for Shravasti, he set me on my road, turning back with the friendly
farewell: 'Don't forget me when your business is
done.' "I continued to Shravasti, where, weary with trav-
el, I lay down to rest among vines in a park outside the city. Awakened by the cry of swans, I rose to see a maiden drawing near, whose feet were eloquent with tinkling anklets. She approached, alternating her at- tention between me and the figure of a man resem- bling me, drawn on a tablet which she held in her hand; she stood for a time in wonder, speculation) and
JOy. "So) seeing my own likeness there on the tablet
and assuming that the play of her glances was not ac- cidental, I said: 'Surely this pleasant spot) this dedi- cated garden, is common property. Why weary your- self with irksome standing? Will you not be seated?'
And she sat down with the smiling reply: 'You are very thoughtful of me: Our desultory conversation developed some personal detail, on which she relied to
PRAMATI'S ADVENTURE
remark: 'You are a guest in my country and seem somewhat fatigued by travel. If it is not wrong) you would confer a favor by resting today in my house.' 'M.Y dear young lady,' said I, 'it is not wrong at all, quite the reverse) rather'; and I followed her home) where I was served with a bath, food, and entertain- ment fit for a king. When I was comfortably seated, she secretly inquired: 'In your devious journeyings, dear sir, did you anywhere by any chance encounter anything in the nature of a miracle?'
"Then this flashed through my mind: 'There is genuine ground for hope. This girl may be a friend of the princess, who may have been unriddled by the whole obtrusive throng of waiting-women. Why, on this tablet appears the palace balcony, with its orient awning shading her; the sweetly tumbled couch, s?immering like clustered clouds of autumn; and the likeness of myself, at rest against its edge) my eyes lapped in slumber. Oh, surely the princess too has been laid so low by love that she) frantic with feverish torment of unendurable feeling) persistently pestered by solicitaus friends, gave them an adequate answer by this creation of careless artistry. This maiden questions me because her suspicion is roused by the correspondence of feature; I will resolve her suspicion
by telling the plain truth.' "With this purpose I said: 'Dear maiden, give me
the picture.' And she put it in my hand. I took it and added my darling, counterfeiting slumber, faint with
.
THE TEN PRINCES
the flickering passion of love; then observed: 'When asleep in a vast, wild wood, J encountered a maid like that, resting beside a man like this. Was it a dream, do you think?' She gleefully demanded details; and I told the whole story. while she described her friend's varying moods toward me. Then I said: 'If your friend's heart inclines to show me kindness, wait a few days. I will return when I have devised some plan for dwelling in the maidens' quarters without awakening suspicion.' 1 won her reluctant assent, re-
turned to the market town. and sought out my gay old gentleman.
"He gave me his bustling attention: provided a bath, food, and the like as before; then inquired pri- vately: 'Sir, why have you returned so promptly?' 'You have reason to ask. Listen, sir,' I said. 'There is a city called Shravasti, whose sovereign is King Dharmavardhana,	an epigonous son of Virtue. He has a daughter	N avumalika,	the refutation	of Beauty,	the life of Love, the denial of daintiness to the jasmine
bud. When I chanced to behold her, she pierced my mortal part with a shower of sidelong glances that seemed a flight of the shafts of Love. Impotent to draw those darts, I return to you, a physician rivaled only by the divine authority on medical science. Will you generously playa part in my plan? I wish to shift to woman's costume and to become your daughter. You will take me to court and will say to Dharma-
vardhana as he sits on his judgment-seat:	"This is
PRAMATl'S ADVENTURE
153
my child, my only daughter. At her very birth, her mother found final rest. I have reared her, a mother and a father too. Now a certain Brahman youth, matrimonially eligible, has gone to the Avanti capital, Ujjain, planning for her sake to earn his marriage- portion of education.	The girl has a fondness for him and should not be bestowed on any other. But she is a young woman) and he is dilatory. I wish to fetch him, marry him fast) delegate responsibility to him, and retire to religious meditation. In view of the difficulty of protecting daughters who have left child- hood's years behind, more particularly motherless daughters, I appear before Your Majesty, the refuge of the afflicted, standing toward your subjects in loco parentis utriusque.	If Your Majesty, the model of an-
tique royal virtue, can regard as worthy of your gra- cious favor an aged Brahman of some scholarship, no resources, and postulant humility, permit this maiden (whose character is irreproachable) to repose in the shadow of your arm until I fetch her predetermined bridegroom."
" 'To this he will certainly give joyful assent and will ask me to live with his daughter. Now on the twelfth day of the proximate month, when you are gone, there will be a festive bathing pilgrimage of the court ladies. You will then be waiting, with a bride- groom's trousseau, in a temple of the war-god) lying in the midst of a clump of ratan about three miles east of the bathing-pool.	I will spend the intervening
•
THE TEN PRINCES
time, with no questions asked, in the pleasant society of the princess; then in the course of this festival I will playfully enter the stream of Ganges; and while all the girls are giddy with gayety, I will dive and swim under water, coming to the surface in your vi- cinity. I will next don the costume you have brought, discard my feminine apparel, and follow you, nomi- nally as your son-in-law to be.
" 'Now when the princess fails to find me after searching everywhere, she will weep and mope in her chamber, saying: "I will not taste food without that girl." When a great caterwauling results, when serv- ants bawl and girl friends whimper and citizens mourn and king and counselors are at their wits' end, you will seek an audience, exhibit me, and say: "Your Majesty, I introduce my son-in-law, a deserving serv-
ant of your might. He is erudite in the four bodies of Scripture; grounded in the six ancillary disciplines; a master of formal logic; au courant both as to theory and practice in the sixty-four social accomplishments; a specialist in literature relating to elephants, chan- ots, and horses; a champion archer and club-fighter; versed in mythology and traditional lore; a creative artist in poetry, drama, and sophisticated fiction; a scholarly economist and mystical theologian; never envious of another's talent; a candid friend; capable;
generous; blest with a retentive memory; unassum- ing. I do not discover in him the most minute posi- tive blemish, or deficiency in virtue. Hence he should
PRAMATI'S ADVENTURE	ISS
not enter the family of a mere Brahman like me. Let me bestow your daughter upon him, then-so please Your Gracious Majesty-proceed	to that final self-ex- ami nation	that	befits	my	declining	years."
"'When he hears this, a pallor will invade his countenance, an extreme dubitancy will oppress his mind; and with his counselors he will endeavor to pacify you by preachments on the impermanence of mortal things. You will turn a deaf ear, strain your lungs in lamentation, choke your throat with cease- less weeping, bring logs of wood, kindle a fire at the palace entrance-gate,	and prepare to mount the pyre. Then king and counselors will fall at your feet, the king will bribe you with unstinted gifts, and will give me his daughter. Presently, appeased by my compe-
tence, he will devolve on me the whole burden of royal administration.	This seems the plan to pursue, if it meets your approval.'
"Then that wisest of wise old gentlemen (Pancha- Iasharman was his name) rehearsed the points in the plot, and entered on its execution, adding ingenious details of his own. The fruition of my wishes followed according to schedule; and, like a bee, I tasted the flower of my virgin jasmine. Thereafter, with the double purpose of succoring King Simhavarman and of keeping the rendezvous with my friends, I mobi- lized all my troops and marched hither to Champa, where heaven grants me a blissful meeting with my prince."
.
THE TEN PRINCES
Having heard the adventure of Pramati, the prince observed, while a smile bloomed slowly on his face: "Energy disguised as grace, vigorous action masked by gentle manners-it	is the wise man's way. Now," and he turned to Mitragupta, "you have your en-
trance cue."
CHAPTER XI MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
He told this tale. "I too, Your Majesty, having the same inducement as my friends for wandering, chanced upon a great festive gathering in a park out- side the city Damalipta in the Suhma country. There in a sequestered bower of creeping vines I beheld a pensive youth, diverting his thoughts by playing a lute, 'Dear sir,' T asked, 'what is this festival, and for what purpose celebrated? For what cause do you, sir, disregard it and sit apart in seeming pensiveness, with a seven-stringed lute as sole companion?'
"And he replied: 'My kindly friend, Tungadhan- van, the childless king of the Suhma country, prayed for two children at the feet of Shiva's bride, who now, forgetting her love for her Vindhya home, dwells in yonder shrine. As he fasted and slept, she spoke to him in a dream:	"One son shall be yours, and a single daughter shall be born. The son shall live a servant of the daughter's husband. The daughter, on the third day of every month from her seventh year until her marriage, must honor me by a dance in which she plays with a ball, that she may acquire a virtuous husband. She must be given to the man whom she loves. And this festival must be called the festival of
the ball."
'57
•
THE TEN PRINCES
....'.Vith no long interval, the king'a dear queen, Medini, gave birth to one 500, and a single daughter was born. Today the princess Kandukavati-r-the girl wi~h the ball-will honor the moon.brewed god- dess with her ball play. But her friend Chandrasena has been my foster-sister, and dear to me; and she, in recent days, has been the object of impetuous ad- v.ances from Prince Bhimadhanvan.	Hence I sit pen- srve apart, stabbed by the darting pain of Love's
arrows, seeking a trifling consolation in the plaintive strain of the lute:
a malden appeared. His eye bloomed wide when he saw her; he rose, and when he sat down in the same place,. her ar:ns were round his neck. 'This is my life,' he chirped) whose loss burns like fire. The prince is D:ath, ta~ing my life and leaving me cold. Yet prince he IS; I cannot injure him. So I will give her one last) lingering look at my person, then cease to draw breath that has no recompense.'
. "~er face swam in tears as she clung closer, say- mg: My dear lord, you must not for my sake dare any desperate deed. You are the son of Arthadasa ,a most respectable merchant, and your elders named you Koshadasa; but because you were so devoted to me, your enemies gave you the nickname Veshadasa -the	gay girl's slave; so if you should die and I should
live, I should prove the proverb that gay girls are heartless. Take me today to some nice country.'
MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
159
"At this moment a tinkle of anklets drew near and .'
"He turned to me and said: 'My dear sir) among the .kingdoms visited by you, which one is wealthy, fertile, and prevailingly populated by the virtuous?' 'My dear sir,' I replied with a slight smile, 'the sea- clad earth is wide. There is no end of pleasant popu- lations in one region and another. Further, jf unable to devise a plan for your happiness and union here, I will myself serve as guide.'
"At this point the jingling of jeweled anklets was heard. The girl jumped up) saying: 'She has come. Princess Kandukavati	is about to honor the Vindhya- dwelling goddess by playing ball. At this festival of the ball the exhibition is public. Satisfy your eyes; come and see. I must wait upon her.' She went) and we followed her.
"The red-lipped princess stood on a great, jeweled dancing platform when I first beheld her. So straight- way was she in my heart that neither I nor any other saw her pass. I gazed amazed and thought) dis- traught: 'Is this the goddess Beauty? No, no. In Beauty's hand a lily lies; her hand is the lily's self. Beauty was sought by primal man and antique kings; her virgin virtue is unstaled by custom's history.'
"Even as I meditated, with wholly faultless grace she crossed her hands and touched the earth with blossom finger tips; her black curls rippled as she paid afiuttering curtsy to the blessed goddess; she held the ball as if she held the love-god in her hand, his eyes flaring with impatient passion. With playful grace
160	THE TEN PRINCES
she dropped it on the ground. As it rose sluggishly, she struck it with her fiower-hand-e-the thumb a little bent, the tender fingers extended-bounced	it from the back of her hand. and caught it falling in mid-air, while her flashing glances flickered round it like bees about a blossom cluster. Then she let it falL Patting or pounding, andante or allegro, she kept its motion
timed with her forward or backward steps. Inert, she made it hop with heartless blows; frisky, she soothed it. Sidewise and straight she struck, with the left hand and the right in turn, making it fly like a bird. If it soared too high, she caught it, taught it moderation; she tossed it wide from side to side, then brought it home.
"Such was her sweet, surprising sport, bringing each moment the cry or the sigh of applause from the fascinated spectators round the platform. While I stood gazing, leaning on Koshadasa's shoulder, with tingling cheek and widened eye and momently mount- ing emotion, she learned the peeping glance of co- quetry from love, till then a stranger, her graceful, curving eyebrows swerving sweetly as she followed
the flight of the ball. The greedy bees that sought to seize the fragrance of her flower-face she seemed to pelt with blooming, rippling rays of light reflected from her lips, rays made wavy by her quick-drawn breath. In her swift pursuit of whirling circles traced by the ball, she seemed to inclose herself within a cage of flowers, in shy avoidance of me. She struck in
MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE	r6r
five directions, as if fearfully baffling the love-gad's five arrows, flying simultaneously.	In flexuous dash she mocked the lightning flash, with its eager gleam against the dark. Her twinkling feet kept time to the tinkling jewels that decked her; her red lip was washed with light as she smiled at the part she played; she tossed to its place the wealth of hair that sought her shoulder. With the jingle of stricken gems on her girdle string, with the gleam of rustling silk that swung from her swaying hips, she gave graceful life to the ball with blows from lovely arms now bent, now straightened.	Then she would fold her arms; then her curls would flutter to rest on her back as she stooped. The rapid readjusting of the fallen earring's golden plate hardly hindered the timing of her steps, and the ball whirled out or in with each quick lift of hand or foot. As she rose and sank, her central necklace string was seen and lost by fleeting moments; as she bowed and stood erect, her pearls had no repose. The breeze from the blossom over her ear served as fan to dry her cheek's cosmetic moistened by starting drops; one blossom-hand was busy in patting the gown that slipped from her bosom's slope. She crouched and rose; she closed and opened her eyes; she paused and began again: and wonder awoke as the princess gaily played.
"Whether bouncing the ball from the ground or keeping it in the air, whether playing with one or with more than one, she showed us many sightly tricks.
,6,	THE TEN PRINCES Then at the end of her friendly diversion with Chan-
drasena and other girls, having worshiped the goddess, attended by my heart as devoted companion, flashing at me a sidelong look like a lotus arrow of blossom- arrowed Love, with a slyly repeated backward turn of a face as sweet as the full moon's disc and a glance that left me in doubt whether or no her heart had darted to meet me and been recalled, she went with her friends to the palace.
"Faint with love, I went to Koshadasa's dwelling. where he assiduously entertained me with a most su- perior bath, food, and other comforts. In the evening came Chandrasena, who showed quiet respect for me, then with tender gentleness rubbed shoulders with her lover and sat down. Koshadasa was delighted.
'All my life, my sweet-eyed love,' he caroled, 'may I thus receive your kindness.' 'Why make a mere prayer of it, my friend?' said I with a smile. 'There is a magic lotion with which she may anoint her eyes. Then when she approaches the prince, she will seem a she- monkey to him; he will forget his love, and abandon her .'
"But she smiled as she replied: 'Oh, sir, you are much too kind to your very humble servant, with your readiness to strip her of human form (without re- birth) and make a monkey of her. Enough of this! There is another way to gain our end. The princess, when playing ball today, was smitten, sir, by your beauty that makes a mock of the love-god, who, as it
MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
angered, tortures her terribly. Having penetrated her secret, I shall tell my mother, who will tell the prin- cess' mother, the queen, who will tell the king. And when the king learns the situation, he will bestow his daughter's hand on you. Then the prince must live as your servant:	such is the decree of the goddess. And when the kingdom is subject to you, Bhimadhanvan will be in no position to Rout you and pester me. So let our friend be patient for three or four days.' With this she bowed to me, embraced her lover, and with- drew. The night dragged away while Koshadasa and I made endless arrangements to conform to her plan.
"When morning dawned, I did my devoirs; then visited the garden blest by the remembered vision of my love. There the prince met me, spoke without in- solence, and engaged me for a time in agreeable con- versation. Conducting me to the palace, he provided a bath, food, and a couch as luxurious as his own. While I slept, enjoying in dream the bliss of behold- ing and clasping my darling, he ordered many stout- armed menials to bind me most securely with fetters of iron. And when I awoke, he pitched into me rough- ly: 'You sneak! Chandrasena's chntter-r-damn her! -drifted	through the lattice and was overheard by a hunchback woman that I employ to follow her and., spy on her. So you love that hussy KandukavatL And I am to live as your servant! And I mustn't flout you! And 1 am to give Chandrasena to Koshadasal'
THE TEN PRINCES
With this he turned to a fellow beside him, shouting: 'Throw him into the ocean!'
"'Yes,	yes, Your Majesty/	cried the fellow, as jol- Iy as if a kingdom had been given him. and he did it. With nothing to cling to, J tossed my arms wildly and clasped to my bosom a stick of wood that fate provid- ed; so I floated while the day passed and a long, long night. At daybreak I spied a kind of boat, manned by Greeks. They pulled me in and reported to their cap- tain Rameshu:	'Here is a man wearing fetters of iron. We found him in the water. We could use him to sprinkle a thousand bunches of grapes at a time.'
"Just then a galley, attended by numerous smaller craft, bore down on us, terrifying the Greeks. The swift boats were about us in a moment, like dogs around a boar. A fight followed, in which the Greeks were worsted. But when they were demoralized and disheartened, I encouraged them by saying: 'Strike off my fetters, and I will destroy your enemies single- handed.' They did so; and I, with a horn-bow that shot showers of shafts with a terrible twang, made mincemeat of all those hostile hirelings.
"I leaped on a boat lashed alongside, and on its death-strewn deck engaged in single combat with the captain, whom 1 captured alive. He proved to be Bhimadhanvan. He showed embarrassment when I introduced myself, and said: 'My son, have you ob- served how oddly fate can hop?' But the crew of the merchantman bound him fast with my discarded fer-
MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
ters, trolled out their joyous chanties, and paid me something like worship.
"However,	the ship got out of hand when buffeted by contrary winds; she fell far off her course and fetched up at a tight little island. Being in need of fresh water, fuel, bulbs, roots, and fruit, we landed on a compact pile of rocks. Before us rose a great moun- tain. 'Ah,' said I, 'this is a charming mountain side, a most lovely lower slope where the very rocks are fra- grant, cool mountain water rich with moonlike drops
of honey from lilies blue and white, an entrancing grove of trees laden with blossom clusters in varied hues'; so I gazed and gazed with eyes that would not be satisfied. I climbed unaware to the summit and came to a pool tinged red by the flashing rocks of a ruby stairway and dusted with lotus pollen.
"After I had bathed, chewed a few nectar-sweet lotus stalks, and pinned a white lily on my shoulder, a hideous ghost rose from the bank and plunged toward ~e, crying 'Who are you? Where do you come from?' In. a tone of scolding disapproval.	'My dear sir,' I re- piled without alarm, '1 am a Brahman, as you can see. I have been traveling-from	an enemy's hand into the sea, from the sea into a Greek ship, from the Greek ship to this admirable mountain with its complex ge- ~Iogy) and I chanced to rest beside this pool. Greet- ~n,gs!' 'If you don't answer my questions; said he, .1Ueat you.' 'Very well,' said 1. 'Ask them.' So our Interview continued with a single quatrain:
166
THE TEN PRINCES
Can a woman's heart be callous? How do good wives please the soul?
Can true love mistake its object? Smartness gain a distant goal?
MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
her that same night. Carrying her when she grew weary, he plunged into a forest. Relieving her hunger and thirst with his own flesh and blood,he carried her, until in mid-journey he encountered a man writhing on the forest floor, with hands and feet and ears and nose cut off. This man too he charitably took on his shoulder, and in a forest nook abounding in bulbs, roots) and deer he laboriously thatched a hut of leaves, where he lived a long time. He treated the piti- ful mutilations with oil of almonds and sesame, and shared his own meat and vegetables equally.
" 'One day, when the wounds were healed and vig~ or had returned, when Dhunyaka had gone to hunt deer, Dhumini approached the man with sexual de- sire, and for all his upbraiding, forced him to satisfy her. When her husband returned and asked for water, she tossed him the bucket and rope, saying: "Draw your own drink; my head aches." Then, as he drew water from the well, she gave him a quick push from behind.
" 'She put the cripple on her shoulder and wan- dered from land to land, winning the name of a devo- ted wife and a variety of honors. Finally she settled down in immense affluence through the favor of His Majesty of Avanti. Presently she learned that her h~sband) accidentally discovered and rescued by thirsty merchants) was roaming Avanti, begging his bread. So Dhumini deposed that he was the wretch who had mutilated her lord, and had that saintly
If 'As to that, you must consult Dhumini, Gemini, Nimbavati, and Nirambavati,' I answered. And when he said: 'Tell me. What sort of women were they?' I related this story.
.. 'There is a country called Trigarta. three householders with much accumulated capital; wr>j they were brothers, and their names were Dhanaka, Dhanyaka, and Dhunyaka. During their lifetime Indra sent no rain for twelve years: the grain drooped, plants failed to seed; trees bore no fruit; the douds were barren; rivers dwindled; swamps were mere mudholes; many springs went dry; bulbs, roots, and fruit grew scarce; story-telling declined; social pleas- ures fell into disuse; robber bands multiplied Canthro- pophagy appeared; human skulls, white as cranes, rolled underfootr-thirsty	crows migrated in clouds; cities, villages, towns, and other settlements decayed.
In it lived
" 'When these hofts~olders had exhausted their store of grain, and had eaten in turn the goats and sheep, the drove of buffalo, the herd of cows, the maidservants, the menservants, the children, the eld- est and the middle wife, they agreed to eat next day
the youngest wife, Dhumini. But Dhunyaka, the youngest brother, unable to eat his darling, fled with
168	THE TEN PRINCES
character condemned by the unwitting king to torture and death.
" 'But when Dhunyaka was being led to execu- tion, his arms bound behind his back-since	a pro- longation of life was predestined, he cheerfully said to the functionary:	"If the beggar whom I am supposed to have mutilated is prepared to speak ill of me, my punishment is deserved." "No harm in trying," said the officer, summoned the cripple. and presented him. That upright fellow wept profusely, fell at the saintly feet, and gave a true relation of the man's charity and the woman's vile behavior. The king, enraged, disfig- ured the trollop's face and appointed her cook for the dogs, while Dhunyaka became the recipient of his fa- vor. And that is why 1 say that woman's heart may be callous.'
"Then, at the ghost's request, I told the story of Gomini: 'In the Dravidian country is a city called Kanchi, where lived Shaktikumara,	the multimillion- aire son of a merchant.	As he approached	the age of eighteen, he anxiously reflected: "There is no true happiness for a man without a wife, or with a wife who lacks the appropriate virtues. Now how could I find a virtuous wife?"
" 'So, diffident of the problematical satisfaction in a wife recommended by others, he became a fortune- teller, tucked a measure of rice in his garment's hem, and roamed the earth. Now those who had daughters
MIrRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
exhibited their daughters to him as a man who could interpret stigmata. But whatever the stigmata, he would say whenever he saw a girl of his own caste:	• "My good girl, can you feed me properly with this measure of rice?" As a result, he wandered from house to house. ridiculed and rejected.
" 'In a city on the right bank of the Kaveri in the Shibi country, he one day inspected a maiden pre~ sented by her nurse. She was meagerly begemmed, for she with her paren ts had run through a great prop- erty. though still possessing a dilapidated mansion. When he set eyes on her, he thought: "In the case of this girl, not a single member is too fat or too thin. too short or too long. lacking in symmetry or purity of outline. The fingers have a tinge of pink; the hands are marked with many stigmata of fortune-the	bar- ley-corn, the fish, the lotus, the bowl, and others. The ankle joints are even; the feet plump, not stringy. The calves have a classic curve; and the knees slip almost
unobserved into the swell of the thighs. The hips are balanced, regular, weedy set, and shaped like chari- ot wheels. The navel has elegance, fiatness.nnd depth; the lower body is adorned with three plicatures. The breasts. with emergent nipples, give a broad-based beauty to the entire chest. The graceful arms are marked with the lines that promise money. grain, and numerous sons; the nails have a glossy polish like a jewel; the fingers are straight, tapering, pink; there is daintiness in the slope of the shoulder, and an absence
17°	TIlE TEN PRINCES
of knobbiness at the joints. The slender neck shows the conch-shell's curve. The lip has a slight pout and an even color; the charming chin does not retreat; the cheek is full and firm; the brows unite to form a black, soft, wavy line; the nose resembles a half-blown ses- amum blossom; the great, gentle eyes have a sweet
and modest glance, yet flashing with three colors- pure black, white, and the pigmented part; the brow charms like the crescent moon; the curls are bewitch- ing as a mine of sapphires; each lovely ear has double decoration, its ring and the winsome line of a droop--
ing lotus stem: the whole face is like a lily. Her hair is
abundant, long, curly (not kinky), not fading even at
the end, of a smooth, glossy black throughout) and fragrant.
MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
171
"'''5 hih	h h
a hollow stalk) and extracted the kernels without crushing the husks. "Mother," she said to the nurse, "jewelers find a use for these husks, which serve to polish gems. Take them these, and with the pennies earned buy firewood-solid	sticks, neither too moist nor too dry-a	modest kettle) and two saucers."
" <When this had been done) in a shallow, wide- mouthed, pot-bellied mortar of urjoon wood, with a long) heavy acacia pestle) plated with iron at the head, smooth in the body) and with a perceptible tenuity in the waist) she caused the grains to rise and fall with the busy grace and skill of her arm; repeatedly made
them hop and sink with her fingers; stripped them of awns in the winnowing sieve; rinsed them a number of times; then-having	paid honor to the fireplace-- dropped them into quintessential boiled water. As the grains softened) hopped) and swelled, she col-
lected the fire) fitted the lid to the kettle, and strained
off the scum. Then she patted with the ladle; stirred
a little at a time; and making sure that the clots were
cooking evenly, set the kettle upside down. Next, she
sprinkled with water such fagots as were only scorched
uc IS er person; t e c aracter must corre- spond. Besides) 1 love her. So 1 will apply my test and marry her. For endless regrets are the certain portion of the heedless." So, with an affectionate
glance) he said to her: "My dear young lady) are you by any chance competent to convert this measure of rice into an adequate meal for me?"
" 'Hereupon the girl signaled with her eyes to the old serving-woman, who took the measure of grain from his hand, washed the girl's feet) and seated her in a spot) carefully sprinkled and swept) before the house door. The girl trampled the fragrant rice) dried it a little at a time, turned it repeatedly in the sun,
put it on a hard) level spot) struck it very gently with
and sent the charred ,but no longer burning) sticks to "
the retailers with the command: "For the pennies you get for these) buy as much as you can in vege- tables) butter) curds, oil, ernblic, and tamarind."
" 'When the nurse had done this) she provided a couple of hers d'oeuvres; then, remarking that the scummy broth should be set in a new saucer planted
THE TEN PRJ TCES
in moist sand, she cooled it with a gentle breeze from a palm-leaf fan, added sufficient salt, and let the smoke from the wood fire scent it; she also ground the emblic fine to bring out its odor, sweet as a locus; next, by the lips of the nurse, she invited him to take a bath. This he did thoroughly, receiving oil and emblic from her after she too had bathed.
.. <After his bath, he seated himself on a plank set on the pavement (sprinkled and swept), and fingered the two saucers of liquid served on the quarter of a greenish white plantain leaf clipped from a tree in the courtyard.	Then she set the rice gruel before him. He drank, relaxed, felt happy; and satisfaction pervaded his frame. Next, she served him two ladlefuls of rice, and brought a little butter, soup, and a relish. The following course was the rest of the rice, with curds, powdered spices, and fragrant, refreshing buttermilk and clotted cheese.
.. 'The man enjoyed his meal to the last morsel, then asked for water. She let it spout a continuous stream from a new pitcher; it was rich with the odor of incense, perfumed with fresh trumpet flowers, fra- grant with full-blown lotuses. He set the saucer to his lips. His eyelashes were tinged and granulated by clinging drops, cool as snow; his ears took delight in the trickling sound of the stream; his cheek tingled and thrilled at the delicious contact; his nostrils ex-
panded to the rushing gush of fragrance; his sense of taste was entranced by the exquisite flavor: he drank
MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
'73
the pure water in great gulps. Then, in obedience to a nod, the maiden gave him a gargle from another ves- sel. Finally, the old nurse cleared the table; and on the pavement, freshly cleansed with cow dung, he dozed for a time, wrapped in his ragged cloak. Greatly pleased, he married the girl with all due ceremony and took her home.
"<After marriage, however, he neglected her and kept a mistress, whom the wife also treated as a dear friend. Her husband she served as a god, indefatiga- ble in personal attention, indomitable in household duty, winning the devotion of domestics by inexhaust- ible considerateness. Subjugated by her merits, the husband subordinated the entire household to her, made her sale mistress of life and person, and thus en-
joyed virtue, money, and love. And that, I may say, is how good wives please the soul.'
"Then, at the ghost's request, I told the tale of Nimbavari:	'In Surat was a city called VaJabhi. In it lived Grihagupta, a ship captain, rich as the god of wealth. He had a daughter Ratnavati, whom a mer- chant's son, Balnbhadra, came from Madhumati to marry. The bliss of secret love with his young bride was, however, impetuously overdone, so that in a flash he conceived no small hatred for her. He did not wish to see her again. He disregarded hundreds of ad- monitions from friends, feeling such embarrassment that he actually avoided the house. From that mo-
•
174
TIlE TEN PRINCES
MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE	175
husband's alienation, point it out; for your intelli- gence is keen."
" 'So the wife painfully pondered for a time with downcast face, drew a long, burning sigh, and said: "Holy mother, her husband is the sale divinity for a woman, at least for the good kind. Therefore I must contrive something that will result in doing what he wishes. Now next door lives a merchant, our most prominent citizen by reason of gentle birth, property, and intimacy with the king. His daughter Kanaka- vati has much my bearing and figure, and is a very dear friend of mine.
" ,"I will play with her, and being on the balcony of her mansion, will double the number of my jewels. Meanwhile you, by piteous petition to her mother, must somehow manage to bring my husband to her house. When you are just below, I will go giddy with gayety and drop a ball, which you will catch and put in his hand, saying:	'My son, that is your wife's friend Kanakavari, daughter of Nidhipatidatta, our most prominent business man. She is quite scandalized with you on Ratnnvati's	account, thinking you frivo-
ment, relatives and strangers mortified the unhappy woman by saying: "This is not Ratnavati, the Jewel Girl; this is Nimbavati, the Bitter-fruit Girl."
" 'After a certain interval of humiliation and of wondering what to do, she saw an aged hermit woman, her foster-mother, approaching with flowers from a sacrificial service; and alone with her, she wept piteously. The old woman tearfully tried every means to soothe her and asked the cause of her weep- ing; whereupon, for all her shame, the matter being so important, she forced herself to stammer: "Oh, Moth- er! What can I say? Unhappy love is a living death
for women, for honest wives especially. My case is an illustration. All my relatives, my mother more than any, look at me with contempt.	Oh, give me a kindly glance. If you won't, this very day I shall lose my use- less life. But do not repeat my secret until it is all over." And she fell at the old woman's feet.
" 'The latter helped her to rise and said with a rush of tears: "My dear child, you must dare no des- perate deed. Here am I, awaiting your commands. Just in so far as I have value, I am wholly at your service. If you are quite despondent, then practice penance (I will show you how) with the aim of other- worldly blessings. Surely this is a consequence of sin in a past existence that you, with such a figure, such character, and such social position, have become, without visible reason, an object of hatred to your husband. If there is any possible remedy for your
lous and heartless. enemy property.'
So you must restore this ball; it is
" '''Hereupon mistake me for my friend; then when 1 bow and beg :or ~he ball, while you nudge him again, he will return ItWItheagerness. Fromthisinitialweaknessyouwill cause him to fall in love, grow warmer and warmer,
he will certainly look up and will
•
TIlE TEN PRINCES
appoint a rendezvous, and elope with me to another country." The old woman joyfully assented and car- ried out the plan.
"'So Balabhadra, deluded by the old hermit worn- an, took her for Kanakavari, made sure of her treas- ure of jewels, and eloped in the interstitial darkness of night. The old woman then spread this gossip: "Balabhadra told me yesterday that he had behaved like a fool in neglecting Ratnavati without valid rea- son, in insulting her parents, and in disregarding his friends; and that, having thus involved himself, he was ashamed to live here. 1 presume it will soon ap- pear that he has taken her away." On hearing this, her relatives made only perfunctory search.
"'Now on the journey Ratnavati procured a slave woman, had her carry the provisions and other baggage, and so came to a hamlet. Even in that small place Balabhadra, a shrewd business man, mul- tiplied his modest capital into a great fortune. He was accounted the leading citizen and had a corps of servants	in proportion	to his wealth.	On one occasion he beat the housekeeper severely, saying roughly: "You neglect your work, you steal everything in sight, you are impudent." The servant was furious and betrayed the critical point in his secret history, which he had told her in a moment of confidence.
"'Upon this information, the avaricious police captain convoked the town council and took him to task, saying: "This scoundrel Balabhadra is living in
MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
'77
OUf city with Kanakavati, whom he stole from her father Nidhipatida tta. You gentlemen will not object to the entire confiscation of his property."
.. 'This alarmed Balabhadra, but Ratnavati said to him: "Do not be alarmed. Tell them that this is not Nidhipatida nn's daughter Kanakavati, but Gri- hagupta's daughter Ratnavati, given you by her par- ents in Valabhi and decently married. If they do not believe, let them send a messenger to her relatives." Balabhadra consented and remained on bail from his guild until Grihagupta, informed by letter, visited the hamlet and returned most joyfully with daughter and
son-in-law. In view of this, Balabhadra became very devoted to Ratnnvati,	still imagining her to be Kana- kavati. Hence I say that love may mistake its object.'
"Finally, when questioned by the ghost, I told the story of Nitambavati:	'In Shurasena is a city called Mathura. In it lived a youth of good family, a de- votee of social elegancies and ga y girls. In his friends' behalf he brought many disagreements to a happy termination by sheer strength of arm, so that rough CUstomers gave	him	the	nickname	Thorny.
" 'One day he met a foreign artist, carrying a pic- ture of a young woman, the mere sight of which made Thorny lovesick. "My dear sir," he said, "this seems incongruous. The figure is almost too beautiful for virtue, yet the modest pose indicates lofty breeding, the complexion is clear, the person charms by a cer-
•
THE TEN PRINCES
tain measure of innocence, the glance shows self-es- teem. Yet her husband is not tra veling: she lacks the single braid and other tokens of separation.	Further, the beauty-spot is set on the right side. I believe that you have represented. with exquisite address, the wife of a dilapidated old business man, miserable from the lack of normal satisfaction."
"f "You are quite right," said the painter, with admiration. "This is Nitambava ti-r-attrnctive as her name-wife	of the merchant Anantakirti	in theAvanti capital, Ujjain. Entranced by her loveliness, I paint- ed her thus." And Thorny, his mind in a whirl, start- ed that moment for Ujjain to see her. He assumed
the name Bhargavn, disguised himself as a beggar, entered her house. and beheld her.
" 'His passion mounted at the sight; on leaving the house, he asked and received from the aldermen the position of policeman in the cemetery. There he procured shrouds from corpses and other garments, with which he paid court to a Buddhist nun named Arhantika. Through her he sounded Nitambavati, who scolded the nun and refused.
" 'Informed by the nun that she was an honest woman, difficult to seduce. he gave his go-between secret instructions: "Approach the merchant's wife once more and whisper this: 'You know me as a seeker after salvation, sunk in religious meditation upon clear perception of the vanity of unregenerate life; could such as I desire to deprave honest wives? The
MITRAGUPTNS ADVENTURE
'79
•
notion is preposterous.	No, I tested you to discover whether such levity, common with the other sort of woman, made any appeal to you. blest with a noble fortune. superhuman beauty. and early youth. I am delighted to find such incorruptibility.	Now I wish to see you a mother.	But your husband is the subject of demoniac possession, is debilitated by jaundice. and incapable of functioning.	You cannot have a child by
him without remedial measures. Now please pay at- tention. You are to enter the orchard alone and. with all secrecy. put your foot in the hand of a necromancer whom I shall conduct thither; when he has spoken a spell over it, you are to feign a lovers' quarrel and kick your husband in the chest. Thereafter he will be
Successful in making yOll the mother of a bouncing baby and will treat you like a queen. Pray feel no hesi- tation.' That she will consent. is obvious. At night you will introduce me into the orchard, and her too. I need ask no further favors from you."
"'To his great pleasure. the nun approved. That same night he entered the orchard; and when Nitam- bavati was produced by the zealous holy woman. in pretending to touch her foot he snatched a golden anklet, lightly scratched her thigh with a knife. and sc.urr~edoff. In dreadful agitation she rated her own frIVolityandwasreadytokillthenun;shebathedthe
'W~undin the garden pond. and bandaged it; then, Witha view to symmetry, she removed the other an- kletJ and lay alone in her bed for three or four days.
•
--------- ~.-
r80
THE TEN PRINCES
MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
r8r
" 'The rogue meanwhile approached Anantakirti, offering the anklet for sale. "This is my wife's an- klet." cried he. "How did you come by it?" But he pressed in vain for an answer, the fellow insisting that he would speak in the presence of the merchant guild.
At last he ordered his wife to send him both her an- klets; and she. in shame and alarm. sent the other one, with this message: "Last night I went to rest in the orchard and lost an anklet when the fastening slipped.
I hunted for it today, and did not find it. But here is
its mate." .. 'Upon this information, the merchant took the
fellow before the merchants' guild. There the rogue, when questioned, modestly reported: "It is known to you of course that by your appointment I guard the graveyard, making my living thereby. I even spend
my nights in the cemetery, thinking that grave-rob~ bers who would seek to avoid me. might occasionally burn the bodies. The other night I saw a woman, a brunette, clawing a half-burned corpse from its pyre. Her greed was greater than her timidity, so that I caught her; and I chanced to scratch her thigh slightly with my knife. I also snatched this anklet from her
foot. At this point she made off in a hurry. I have
graveyard; she w~s lame~ting piteously, knotting a ~oose, and preparing to die. He soothed her, saying: My sweet, maddened by your beauty, I suggested through the nun many means of winning you; and whe,n.they ~ailed, I adopted this means to give you undivided,	lifelong love. Forgive your slave who has
no other hope." He fell repeatedly at her feet, whee- dled her hundreds of times. and won her consent- for she had no other recourse. So it may be said that cleverness gains a difficult goal.'
"Having listened to this, the ghost paid me honor . At this moment pearls, big as half-developed iron- wood buds, and drops of water began falling from the s~y. I glanced up in considerable surprise, to see a giant dragging a struggling woman with him. 'Look at that ill-bred ogre, abducting a woman against her will!' I cried, grieved at my limitations in celestial 10- comotion and my lack of a sword. But my friend the g~ost rose with a scolding cry: 'Stop, scoundrel! Stop. kidnaper!' and took issue with the giant. The maiden, ~ropped in heedless fury, came falling from the sky like a blossom cluster from the tree of Paradise, and I caught her with upstretched arms. She trembled, kept her eyes closed, and tingled with pleasure .at touching my person, so that I held her just so, not
setting her down . "Meanwhile the other two were destroying each
other with mountain crags, vehemently uprooted
told you how 1came by it; further action rests with
you. .. .. 'So the citizens, after deliberation, unanimously
voted that she was a witch. Her husband cast her off, and the rogue encountered her at night in that same
•
IS'
THE TEN PRINCES
MITRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
"At once I reported the facts to the king and re- stored both his children. In his delight the lord of Damalipta made me his son-in-law, and the prince be- came my servant. At my command, the creature, for dear life's sake, dropped Chandrasena, who gave her love to Koshadasa. Thereupon, I marched hither to succor Simhavarman,	and now experience a blissful holiday in beholding you, my lord."
"A strange evolution of fate!" cried Prince Raja- ~ahana, "and manliness happy in seizing opportuni- ties!" Then, while a smile sparkled on his lip, he fixed on Mantragupta	a glance that flowered with joy. The latter's lifted hands half hid his face, and as his lovely lip twitched with the soreness left by a charming mis- tress' kisses, he told his tale without the use of labial letters.
trees, and blows from fists and feet. But her I laid on the softest sand of the lake's petal-dotted margin, made a rapturous inspection, and discerned my life's sole darling, Princess Kandukavati.	As I soothed her back to calmness, she examined me with peeping glances, recognized me, and piteously weeping, said;
'Oh, my dear lord, at the festival of the ball I fell deeply in love at first sight and was encouraged by my friend Chandrasena with tales of you. So when I heard that you were drowned in the middle of the sea
by my wicked brother Bhimadhanvan, I eluded my friends and servants and went alone into the garden, longing to leave life behind. There that nasty giant- who can change his form at will-made	love to me. I rejected his proposal with quivering terror, but he
seized me and made off. And here he came to his end,
you saw how. And I, by happy chance, fell into the
hand of the lord of my life. Bless you!' "On hearing this, I descended the moun tain wirh
her and embarked.	We cast off the moorings; and the ship, flying before the return wind, sailed back to Damalipta, where we disembarked in a hurry. We were met by the wailing of weeping citizens, lament- ing: "I'ungadhanvan, king of Suhmn, childless
through the loss of son and daughter, and stricken in years, sets forth with his consor-t-queen to seek slow peace by starvation on stainless Ganges' shore. The loyal Board of Aldermen, knowing no other lord, plan
to die beside him.'
•
CHAPTER XII MANTRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
"I too, a joy of the king of kings, longing to learn the fate that followed you into the mountain cave, came in my wandering	to Kalinga.	At a little distance from the Kalinga city, I sat on the fragrant, flower- strewn slope of a hill, in a wild wood adjoining a cre- mating cemetery; sleep licked my eyes, and I reclined.
"While darkness drifted from black night's spread- ing tresses, at the hour when fiends are free, fog falls, cold chills, and the whole world snugly hugs its home -as I fought the slumber that softly stroked my eyes with rustling bustle from densely interlacing branches -there came to my ear this strident whining of two giants, male and female: 'Why does that villainous magician-damn	him !-choose	to give orders at the hour when love is longing) and so abuse poor people distressed by excess of passion? May some omnip- otence confound our vile king's magic!'
"A curiosity assailed my heart to see who this ma- gician was) and what this magic, and what this menial giant had in hand. So, moving a little distance toward him, I beheld a creature with body-decorations formed from grimly gleaming bits of dead men's bones, with smears of ashy dust from half-charred coals of fire-scorched wood) with matted hair tawny
'IS
•
•
186
THE TEN PRINCES
MANTRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
"So I instructed him: 'My friend, this is the path trodden by the righ teens, for petty cause to show no petty gratitude. If then your purpose holds, restore to her home this maiden whose Jissom form, impatient of abuse, has been most roughly abused by that im- moral creature. Thus you would completely satisfy my heart.'
"On hearing this, she darted a somewhat sidelong, bravely gleaming glance, that seemed a dark-hued lily clinging to her ear; with languid charm she made graceful play with eyebrows curved like Cupid's bow, dancing on the stage of her forehead; her cheek tin- gled with a blush; she hovered midway between desire and shrinking; with toetips curled and flashing light from their nails, she nervously marked the ground, while she turned aside the flower of her face; her breath that, issuing from her mouth, burdened her blossom-lip, that dried the sandal powder on her bos- om's slope (wet with intercrossing beads of spray from streams of joyful tears), slow-drawn yet swift as Love's skilled shaft in piercing its target of the heart -r-that breath framed in the tremulous gleam of a smile these few words, soft and sweet as a cuckoo's song: 'Oh, sir, for what cause do you snatch your handmaid from the clutch of death, only to fling her straight into the sea of love, tossed by tempests of passion, restless with billows of longing? I would be considered but a grain of dust on your fair foot; if you feel pity for such, let me linger, clinging still. And if
as the lightning flash; his left hand sprinkled sesame, mustard, and other substances with constant crepita- tion upon a fire that spouted flame-sheets as it clutched each moment and devoured its diverse fuel-r- an ogreish fire that gulped the blackness of encircling forests. Before him cringed the menial, crying: 'What must I do? Grant a command.' From that bestial
being he received this order: 'Go to the palace of Kardana, Kalinga's king; bring hither his daughter Kanakalekha.'	And the giant did it.
"With frightful fear, with tear-choked throat, with torment-tortured	heart, she screamed for father and mother, while the sorcerer scattered the drooping blossoms of her chaplet, tore the ribbon, and clutched
her flowing hair, quivering with zeal to sever her head with the knife he had whetted on a rock. In a flash I snatched the knife from his hand, severing his own head with its matted mass of unkempt hair and thrusting it into the hollow trunk of a handy rotten tree. On seeing this, the compliant giant's anguish
languished, and he said: 'Oh, sir, sleep never visits my eyes for the badgering gripe of this beast. He menaces, he terrifies, he issues immoral orders. Oh, you have done a happy, holy deed in sending that hu- man crow to taste the flavor of hell's torments in the son of Lucifer's city. You are a treasure of mercy, an
infini ty of glory; and your humble servant longs to do your bidding. Quick! Issue orders.' And he bowed low.
•
J 88	THE	TEN	PRINCES
you dread to dwell in a princess' palace, lest the secret be calamitously betrayed, dismiss the fear; for my friends and my attendants are devoted and will strive that none may know.'
"Then the love-god. drew his bowstring to his ear and pitilessly pierced my heart; her peeping glances, like ferreous fetters, bound me fast; I fixed my gaze on the giant's face, and spoke: 'Should I disobey this winsome lady, love would lead me straightway to nothingness. Take me with this fawn-eyed maiden to the maidens' mansion.' And that night-flier took me
to the maidens' wing of the palace, dazzling as massed clouds of autumn.
"There for a certain space of time, at my moon- faced maiden's behest, I stood on the moon-balcony, my desire for independence oozing at sight of her. But she roused certain girls, her friends, from heedless slumber by gentle clapping of her hands and gave them knowledge of our situation. These then ap- proached, and prostrate at my feet, their eyes filled with starting tears, spoke in soft, singing tones blurred by the buzz of numerous bees drawn to the filaments of flowers in their hair: 'Sir, your glory vanquishes the sun. This friend of ours failed to be plucked by death only because she became the target of your glance. She has now been given you by Love, her guardian, with passion's flame as witness. Then Jet
your soft eyes behold this passion-quivering gem of wonder adorning a bosom unshaken as a rock on the
MANTRAGUPTA'S	ADVENTURE	189
Mount of Jewels; and let her breast be blest with the- close embraces of a most fitting mate.' Thus the fet- ters of my love were riveted by her most courteous friends, and I was beatified in union with my lissom lady.
"Then came a season when the hearts of absent husbands languished, when the crowding iron-woods drooped at the assaults of greedy bees, when the ses- amum trees dotted with beauty the face of flashing forests, when playful King Love stole the waking wingseed blossoms to serve him as golden urnbrella, when the rush of southern breezes blew bees and blos- soms from the mangoes, when warbling cuckoos' pas- sion offered impassioned fairies their initial weapon for campaigns of love, when shyness fought with eager longing in the minds of modest maidens, when breezes
cooled by contact with sandal on southern mountain slopes gave graceful dancing lessons to various classes of vines. At this season Kalinga's king, with the women of his court, his daughter, and all the city's population, for thirteen days gave way to the taste for playful holidays in a forest by the sea-a forest that assaulting sunbeams could not enter, with sand- banks Stroked by blossom dusters on vine twigs bend- ing to the rush of buzzing bees, and cooled by douds of spray from breaking billows.
. "There women gathered by the thousand for con- tmuous song and concert and for amorous dalliance. And while the king delighted in coquetry's endless
•
ICJO
THE TEN PRINCES
MANTRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE	191
merits, and the like, acquired from people fooled by a pack of juggling	tricks.
"After some days I came to the Andhra capital, at a distance from which I dwelt in a forest beside a lake that stretched away like the ocean, was dotted with bits of petals dropped from countless lilies clipped by swarming swans, was made beautiful by Rocking c~~es. I displayed dexterity in bamboozling all the cI.tl~ens,attracting them by artful dodges that my disciples advertised, until this report of me was uni- versal: 'You know that hermit who sleeps on the bare
ground at the edge of the Jake in the wilderness? He has all the Scriptures-all	their mysteries and the six ancillary disciplines, too-at	the tip of his tongue. And all the other books that nobody understands-
he will explain you their meaning from the meaning o.fthose. Nothing falls from his lips that isn't so. Be- Sides,he is benevolence personified. That is why his cer~monies always succeed. Just by sprinkling on their heads a few grains of dust from his feet, lots of people have been cured oflots of diseases that no doc- tor could touch. Purify your head with water that has washed his feet, and that moment disappear the fiercest seizures that follow all the machinations of necromancers. You cannot imagine any limit to his PO~~r.. And he hasn't the least grain of conceit.'
T.hls gossip, being in everybody's mouth, sufficed
to entice the king, whose mind was concentrated on
the I. expu sion of the Yaksha that possessed Kanaka-
crisscross, quite subdued to love of love, a. numerous sea-borne army startled him; and Jayasimha, king of Andhra, took him captive with his queen. My dar- ling also, Kanakalekha,	was led captive away with her
friends, her eyes dancing with fright. "Then the flame of love devoured me, all thought
of food subdued by anxious longing; grace left my per- son as I pondered: 'Gone! The daughter of Kalinga's king, with father and mother, in hostile hands! That king will of a certainty lose self-control and strive to seize her. This she will not endure, and will find a way-poison perhaps-e-of sudden death. When she is in that state, love will loose my hold on life. What
rescue may there be?' "At this point appeared a Brahman, journeying
from the Andhra capital, who told this story: "[aye- simha has striven to slay Kardana from rancor roused by numerous reproaches, yet spared him for love fed by the sight of Kanakalekha.	But the princess, pos- sessed by a certain Yaksha, disdains to stand before the monarch. The latter, calling numerous necro- mancers to his aid, struggles to expel the spirit, but vainly.'
"Then I saw hope. From that old hollow tree that had set the stage for Shiva's dance I drew a mass of matted hair, becoming so an unkempt sorcerer, and concealed all my person with a begging-wallet and abundant rags. I also enlisted certain disciples, whom I kept in constant good humor by gifts of food, gar-
•
THE TEN PRINCES
lekha. He visited me daily; manifested the most wor- shipful consideration; bribed my disciples; and at ~ast, picking his moment, bashfully b~soug~t m~ se:vlces. I plunged into meditation, received illumination at the proper moment. fixed him with a stare, and spoke: 'My son, your effort is worthy. For the acquisition.of this jewel among maidens, sole repository of all stig- mata of fortune, will lead to domination of the earth, shining in her girdle of the milky sea, radiant with a
thousand strings of pearls in the Ganges and other streams. Yet the Yaksha who possesses her permits no necromancer to behold those eyes, graceful and dark-hued as lilies; therefore be patient for three days, while I endea vor to attain your object.'
"Thus instructed, the king departed happily. And I went forth, night after moonless night, when ,the whole horizon was engulfed by multitudinous, dm?- ing grains of darkness and sleep held all eyes of .men in its fetters, to hollow out with a spade, at a distance
from the landing steps, a spot on the shore of the lake, water-tight, with a hardly discernible aperture, yet possible to enter from water-level. When I,had dO,sed the entrance with thick-set stone and brick until I deemed the appearance of the shore unsuspicious, I cleansed my person with my morning bath, took red
lilies in my hands, and adored the sun-the	central gem in heaven's pearl necklace of countless constel~a- tiona; the sole lion for the slaying of night'S dark, wild elephant; the graceful dancer on the stage of Golden
MANTRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE
'93
Mountain's peak; the only crocodile to breast the gathered, billowing clouds of heaven's sea; the witness of right and wrong; the possessor of a thousand beams to streak with beauty the body of the East. There- after I sought my dwelling.
"When the three days were gone, when the lord of day showed a glory equaling the splendor of the gold- en slope of Sunset Peak and was yet more beautiful beside the swelling, sandal-scented breast of twilight (who clothed herself in impalpable air for fear of in- sult from Shiva's jealous bride), the king drew near, so lowly bowing that his diadem flashed reflected light from the nails of my feet on the ground. And I discoursed thus: 'I felicitate you on seeing the happy ISsueof your wishes. For in this world success visits no soul that does not strive, while all blessings are ever ready to the hand of those not indolent. Thus my spirit has been induced by your lofty, pure-minded pi- ety, by your worshipful deference, to so consecrate this lake that here and now success may come to you.
At ~idnight you are to plunge in throat-high, then straightway float as quiet as may be on the water's surface, holding motionless the breath in your body. A~tera moment, for one who gives ear to the raucous Cries of frightened swans scratched by the prickly stalks of swaying lotus clusters hidden in the waves that lap the shore, there will become audible the rum- bling roar of mighty waters. When that rumbling ceases, you will emerge, dripping, with slightly red-
•
THE TEN PRINCES
MANTRAGUPTA'S ADVENTURE	195
pleasantly scented water, assume white garlands and
cosmetics, propitiate with gifts appropriate to your stand.Andthemaiden'sheart,fetteredbyavesll~- powerallthedivinitiesofearth;thenreturn,dispell-
194
dened eyes, but endued with beauty c~arming all be-
breakable bonds, will find unendurable a moment 5 intermission of your society; while the wide expa~se of earth (your second bride), not overmuch reg~rdtng your disdained rivals, may undoubt~dly be cons,d~red safe in your hand. If this approves Itself, let function- aries soundly based in varied specialties, with numer- ous other well-wishers, provide and produce a hundred fishermen; let them post hundreds of confidential
agents at determined intervals along the lake;. and let them institute an alert service of sentinel soldiers at a distance of thirty fathoms from the bank. ~ho knows, in such a case, what enemies may plot, If a loophole be left?'	.
"This captivated his fancy, while his (uncoon-
aries raised no objection, since they could detec~ no
defect in the plan and realized that the k..ing'sdesign,
holders before which that Yaksha will not dare to
,I'
born of deep desire for the maiden, was irrevocably
ing night's deep darkness with thousands of flames on torch-tips dipped in oil of sesame, and strive to- ward success.'
"And he, to manifest his gratitude, replied: 'This success is no success if you, sir, are absent.	Such lofty indifference is a melancholy thing, depriving your un- offending servant of your presence. Yet the words of the worthy may not be frustrate.' And he departed for his bath.
"So I went forth in the lonely night and hid in the hole in the shore, pressing my ear to a tiny crack. At midnight came the king, having completed the cere- monies enjoined; posted guards from spot to spot, and brought his fisherfolk. Since the inner prickings of apprehension had been banished, he plunged with abandon into the water of the lake. And when, with flying hair and stopped ears and nose, he reached an elephant's depth, I caught him as he floated by a
crocodile's trick, myself nee emerging, lind wrapped m! begging-wallet round his throat. In my pitiless gnp, under blows from lists and feet relentless as the ruthless death~god's gripe, he soon became motion- ~ess.Then I dragged the body to the hole, hid it, and Issued from the water.
"Among the gathered soldiers that change of form awakened amazement.	But 1 mounted an elephant,
fixed. As he stood there, absorbed in his purpose, I
addressed him: '0 King, I have lingered long among
your people, yet such long lingering is not re~om-
mended to such as 1. When your object is attamed,
YOU will see me here no more. So long 1 have lingered,
·bl·fI feeling that my departure would be reprebensi e I
.	f	. .	e mouth- rendered you no service a ter receiving som
fuls of food in your kingdom. 1 have now rendered such service. Go then to the palace, bathe in pure,
THE T
PRINCES
MANTRAGUPTA'S	ADVENTURE	197
before me on some mission, I quietly inquired: 'Have you by any chance at any time seen such a person as I am?' After a brief glance, her heart climbed the cli- max of joy; she made pretty play with the gleaming grace of a smile; she covered her blossom-lip with the swaying branch of her hand; the moisture of joy loosened the rouge around her eyes; bowing low, she stammered slow words of affection: 'Indeed I know well. if this be no web of magic. Tell me what it means.' I told her all, and taught her lips a message to produce perfect bliss in her friend's heart. There- after I freed the king of Kalinga and paid him honor; he gave me my darling in lawful wedlock; and happy with her) I ruled the realms of Andhra and Kalinga- Then I led hither a sizable army to succor the Anga monarch assailed by his foe, and chancing to meet you in the midst of my friends, felt my soul overflow with
delight." While all the friends greeted with congratulations
this tale of clever craft, Prince Rajavahana. his lip bathed in the light of a smile, declared: "A marvelous feat of holiness! In this case also religious self_denial bears noble fruit! But joking aside. we witness here the quintessence of adroitness and resolution, culmi- nating in joy." Hereupon he cast on scholarly Vi- shruta a glance that seemed a blooming lily, and said: "Will you descend in to our mortal world r"
laid claim to the white umbrella and all other shining insignia of royalty, and traveled by the king's high- way, the throng falling back in fear of a beating from the truncheons of grim policemen. That night emo-
tion drove desire of sleep from my eyes. And when the sun's circle swung in sight, seeming the red- streaked head of a heavenly elephant or a jeweled mirror for the face of the East, I did my devoirs: seated myself on the royal throne brilliant with thick- set gems that bristled with rays of light; and addressed
my retinue seated near, whose attitudes were con- strained by respectful timidity as they observed my conformance to convention: 'Behold the power of holiness, since through that unconquerable hermit's sinless self-discipline 1 acquired this changed and most sightly body, lustrous as a lotus petal, in that
lake whose lilies draw the happy bees. Today let every heretic head be bowed in shame.	ow let the temples of the most high gods-Shiva,	Vishnu, Brahma, and the rest-witness	pious services of dance and song. And let all applicants receive from this palace suffi- cient wealth to banish misery.'
"And they, their eyes wide with a sense of the rni- raculous, cried: 'Subdue) 0 lord of the world, the whole wide world; hide beneath your glory the glories of the primal king.' Repeating such blessings,
they performed the ceremonies enjoined. "Now when a maiden named Shashankasena, a
dearly loved friend of my beloved, chanced to come
•
CHAPTER XIII
VISHRUTA'S ADVENTURE
He told this tale. "Your Majesty, I wandered too; and in the Vindhya forest I met beside a well a lad of some eight years, unfit to suffer, yet suffering from hunger and thirst. He stammered with fright: '0 no- ble sir, help me in my suffering. An aged man, my sole support, fell into this well while drawing water to quench my devouring thirst, and I cannot pull him out.' I approached, extracted the old gentleman by means of a vine-stem, reinvigorated the boy with water drawn through a hollow bamboo and five or six fruits which I knocked with stones from the top of a bread-fruit tree that rose an arrow's flight above us. Then I sat in the shade and questioned the ancient: 'Father, who is this boy? Who, indeed, are you? And how did this mishap befall?'
"He choked with tears as he replied: 'Listen, no- ble sir. In the Vidarbha country lived one Punyavar- man, the gem of Bhoja's royal line, who seemed a par- tial incarnation of Virtue. He was powerful, truthful, bountiful; self_disciplined, he disciplined his people and attached his dependents; he was glorious, lofty, vigorous in mind and body; he made masterpieces his model, and undertook what was feasible yet ideal; he caressed the wise, impressed his servants, blessed his
'99
200
THE TEN PRJ CES
VISHRUTA'S ADVENTURE	201
pruden~ly, he is baffled in his enterprises, is exploited by subjects and foreigners. He is despised, and his commands no longer conduce to security or prosperity of his people. His people, disobeying his edicts, say what they like, behave as they like, confound all the proprieties. And people who disregard decorum exile their master and themselves both from this world and the next. Surely, the common man travels contented-
ly only on the road lighted by the lamp of tested knowledge. Nay, the divine eye of demonstrated fact ranges unimpeded over objects recondite or remote, over past, present, and future. Without it, though boasting two large, wide--opened eyes, a man is blind, unable to discern the nature of things. Therefore abandon your passion for decorative studies and mas- ter political science, necessary in your station. Fortify your power by this acquisition; establish an enduring and unquestioned rule over the sea-girdled earth."
" 'On hearing this, the king said: "My teacher gives me opportune instruction. It shall be done." And he entered the women's part of the palace. When he took occasion to mention the matter to the ladies, he was overheard	by a fellow, Viharabhadra,	who was sitting there-a	skilful mind-reader, a privileged per- son, an adept in song, dance, instrumental music, and related arts, a connoisseur of unconventional women, shrewd, talkative, suggestive, critical, a buffoon, a
scandalmonger, a detractor, ready to take bribes even from ministers of state, an instructor in all naughti-
kinsfolk, distressed his foes: he was deaf to illogical discourse, insatiable in his thirst for virtue, discrimi- nating in the social arts, a penetrating critic of ethi- cal and economic compendia; he recompensed the slightest favor munificently, supervised treasury and stables heedfully, controlled all functionaries watch- fully; encouraging the conscientious by gifts and hon- ors, he had a ready remedy for calamities brought by gods or men; he was deft in applying the six expedi- ents and regulated the four castes with traditional wisdom; his glory was pure. He filled the life of a man
with worthy deeds, yet for the unworthiness of his subjects was translated into divinity.
.. 'His successor as ruler of the land was his son Anantavarman	who, though rich in every virtue, hap- pened to be somewhat inattentive to administrative duty. One day he was privately admonished by an aged counselor, Vasurakshita,	a favorite of his father's and an outspoken man: "My son, you possess in full measure every personal advantage, beginning with noble birth. Your intelligence is naturally keen, and distinguished beyond others by large attainments in dance, vocal music, and similar arts, as well as in the subtle minutiae of poetry. Yet that intelligence, un- disciplined in political science, appe:lTs dull, like gold
nor purified by fire. For even an exalted king, if de- void of trained intelligence, does not perceive when enemies are getting the better of him. Nor can he properly discriminate effect and cause. Acting im-
202	THE TEN PRINCES
ness, a pilot in amorous intrigue, a corruptor of youth.
e< 'This fellow smiled and said: "Your Majesty, whenever aman becomes the lucky recipient of power, rascals find means to abuse his mind with manifold inducements, thus serving their own purposes. Some, for example, holding out the hope of exquisite re- wards to be enjoyed actually after death, shave his head, tie him with cords of sacred grass, wrap him in a
fuzzy skin, smear him with butter, send him starving to bed-meanwhile	abstracting a11his property. Even more terrible are the hypocrites who rob him of son, wife, body, and life itself. And if a fellow of the more sensible sort refuses to part with his possessions for this mirage, yet others crowd around him, saying: 'We know how to convert a single penny into a fortune, how to kill all your enemies without a sword, how to make an unaided mortal emperor, if you follow the path we point out.'
... "And when he asks: 'What path is that?' they continue: 'Well, there are four royal studies-theol- ogy, agriculture, metaphysics, political science. Three of them-theology,	agriculture,	metaphysics-are	big and slow to show results. Leave them alone. Just study political science. Now Professor Vishnugupta has made a little epitome of this for the king-twenty- four thousand lines of poetry. Learn it by heart, ap- ply it in detail; and it does what it promises.' 'Good,' says he, and starts to study. He learns it (meanwhile
VISHRUTA'S	ADVENTURE	203
growing old) and finds that book leading to other
books. It can't be truly understood until the whole
wordy mass is mastered.	Well, suppose .he does mas-
ter it, later or sooner. The first result IS that he n.o
longer trusts anyone, even son or wife. E~en for his
own belly he must have just so much porridge, m.ade
of just so many grains of rice. For the cooking of Just .'	ch fire
so much porridge, he must be given Just so rnu	- wood, correctly weighed and measured.	.
.. f "Having risen from table, after .absorblllg a fistful (or half a fistful) with his mouth rinsed (or u~- rinsed), he must spend the first eighth o.fthe day.m listening to a complete statement of receipts and dis- bursements.	While he is listening, a double amount is stolen by the knavish bureaucrats wh~ have the
wit to multiply
. ulaticn taught
a thousandfold
b Ch	k' y	ana ya. .	h	i r
the forty tr1cks ~f pec-
.	. his ears tingle with t e vocrrera I
.	.,	A d	the legal officersde- jects-r-a tough life! n even so,	.
.,	d c	ding to their own no-
terrrune victory and ereat accor 1	.., .	.	.	libl formJUstlcean
d
nons making the king respons e	h hi d
,	.'	t	Intetlr shame and for their own 10teres s.
eighth he gets a chance to at e an	.'. '.	.	'1 h foodisquite digeste . always afraid of pOisonunti t e	h' h d
In the fourth eighth, he stands stretching out IS an to receive gold.	ith counsels
In the second eighth, . ..
tion of litigious sub-
h . bh deatbuteIS
"In the fifth, he has great bother w . I make pnvate com-
"< of state Here too the counse ors	h .
.,	d juggle at t eir binations as if they were neutrals, an J
d
TIfE TEN PRINCES
own sweet will the inexpedient and the expedient, the possible and the impossible, the reports of envoys and spies, places, times, enterprises, situations, so picking a living from their adherents, opponents. and friends. By secretly stirring foreign and domestic passions, then seeming to pacify them publicly, they hold their monarch in subjection. In the sixth, recreation "or more counsels of state; you see, his maximum time for recreation is ninety minutes. In the seventh, a tire-
some military review. In the eighth, worry about the competence of his friend, the general.
" • "When at last he greets the twilight, in the first eighth of the night he must interview secret agents and, in accordance with their reports, set des- peradoes at work-murderers,	incendiaries, poisoners.: In the second eighth, after snatching a bite, he says his prayers like a priest. In the third, he lies down to a musical accompaniment and can sleep (perhaps) through the fourth and fifth. Let him rest as best he
can, poor duffer, with his mind dizzy with everlasting fretting. Then in the sixth begins bother with books and bother with business; in the seventh, more coun- sel and despatch of messengers. Of COursethe messen- gers exaggerate both pleasant reports and accounts of misfortune, to increase their trade on roads where they pay no tolls; by manufacturing business out of next to nothing, they keep forever on the go. In the
eighth, the chaplain and others come and say: 'A bad dream last night! The planets are adverse, and the
VlSHRUTA'S ADVENTURE
2°5
)
omens evil. Let us have expiatory services, and let all the sacrificial equipment be of solid gold-only so is the ceremony efficacious. These Brahmans are al- most like the god Brahma; a benediction pronounced by them brings a double blessing. And those others are pitifully poor, with large families, and ~re compe~ tent performers, but have never yet received a f~e; anything you give them spells heaven, long life, aVOId- ance of calamity.'	Thus they extract tremendous fees in others' names and slyly devour them.
" , "So when 'a man learns his political science and governs accordingly-without	a particle of repos.e~ay or night, with no end of botheration, with unrer:lIttmg irritations-he	finds it difficult to control hIS own household, not to mention an empire. Whatever gifts, whatever homage, whatever compliments he gets from his fellow-scholars, he thinks a cheat and does not trust them. Now lack of confidence is the mother of misfortune.	The less technique a man uses, the bet-
o0 ter he succeeds.	SCienceIS wasted. Why , even a baby
contrives to get milk from his mother, one way or ~n- other. Drop this cramping research; follow your m-
stincts to the pleasures of sense.	ThO
0 IS IS
h' . the way to elude the way to conquer the senses; t IS IS	,
h	ch: " • "Take the very fellows w 0 prea .
o the six enemies (desire, anger, gree ,
1 h c	rules of strategy to sity envy); always app y t e lour..	.
,0 friends and enemies; spen you	leasure'
about peace and war;
d	"	momen t to p easure on t gIve a
d passlOn,perver-
d	r time 10 worrymg
206
THE TEN PRINCES
VISHRUTA'S ADVENTURE
2°7
-why, these pious frauds enjoy the salary stolen from you in servant-girls' houses. And what kind of scamps are the inspired scribblers who are so fierce on theory-Shukra,	Angirasa, Vishnu, Indra, Parashara, and all the rest? Did they conquer the six enemies? Did they practice what they preached? You can read success or failure in what they actually did. Besides, the educated are fooled by the uneducated, in plenty of cases.
". "Would it not be silly for Your Majesty, con- sidering your universally honored ancestry, blooming youth, handsome appearance, and limitless power? Don't spoil it all by studying science: that makes you distrust everybody, interferes with enjoyment, com- pels you to consider alternatives, and so troubles every enterprise with doubt. You have ten thousand elephants, three hundred thousand horses, no end of foot soldiers; and your treasuries burst with gold and gems. And if all the people in the world should eat for a. thousand ages, they would not empty your grana- ries.
.. , "Isn't it enough to take pains with what others ~ave earned for you? Why, the life of a mortal passes like four or five days, and precious little of that fit for ~eal.enjoyment.	Fools earn money and go to seed do- Ing It; they don't want to take the smallest nibble at what they have earned. Why spin it out? Pack the ad- ministrative burden on devoted friends who have backs for burdens; amuse yourself with these heaven-"
Iy ladies; indulge in song, music, drink, and gossip as occasion offers; make your body pay its way." With this he fell Rat on the floor and lay still, his hands clasped on his brow, while the ladies laughed aloud and their eyes twinkled approval.
.. 'Then the monarch smiled and said: "Rise! You give me good advice, and are therefore my teacher. Why behave in a manner so unprofessorial?" So he helped him to his feet, remaining in playful hu~or.
" 'In the following days, when repeatedly sumu-
lated by the old counselor to the appointed task, he
assented verbally, but inwardly despised him as a ped-
ant. So then the counselor reflected: "I am an ob-
stinate blockhead. Urging him to an irksome task, I
have become in his eyes an importunate bore, an ob-
ject of ridicule. His conduct is quite obvio~sly altered.
Thus, he no longer looks on me with affection; he does
not speak with a smile, or impart his secrets, or touch
my hand. He does not sympathize with my setbacks,
or congratulate me on happy occasions. He sends me
no ingratiating	gifts and does not enumerate my serv-
ices. He no longer inquires about my household, .or
notices my friends, or confides his plans to me, or m-
vites me to visit the ladies. Moreover, he employs me
in humiliating jobs permits others to pre-empt my
remarks unanswered.
.	.	.	fid	enemies leaves my chair, gives his con ence to my	, '1· fail
.. ings, turns any faibless« 0 f mme into a	,
H	h dmy[amiiar an- e repre en s	.	h.
.	d b me does not ac- own conviction when ehampiooe	Y	,
J' est	rejects	IS
208
THE TEN PRINCES
VISHRUTA'S ADVENTURE
wash some vice or other, after this fashion: "Your Majesty, there is nothing so beneficial as hunting. It gives the legs magnificent exercise; and long-winded speed might prove very handy after a defeat. It dries up the phlegmatic humor; thus promoting digestion, the sale foundation of health. By reducing fat, it makes the body vigorous, sinewy, agile. It gives power to endure cold, heat, wind, rain) hunger, thirst. It interprets the mental activities of living beings from their physical expression. It supplements scanty crops with the flesh of deer, buffaloes, wild oxen, and other game. It makes land routes secure by killing such creatures as wolves and tigers. It explores moun- tainous or forested regions, with their varied re-
sources. It wins the confidence of jungle tribes. It
fosters energy, thus impressing hostile armies. These
advantages deserve a high rating. ... "Or take gambling. It develops an unexampled
magnanimity,	since you drop a pile of money li~e a straw. With its alternations of winning and losing, it liberates you from servile joy or despondency. It nourishes impetuosity, the basis of all manliness. !t compels a continuous exercise of quick intelli~enc: m detecting tricks (very difficult to perceiv.e) With dice, sleight of hand, the board) and other eqUipment .. .I?e- man ding exclusive attention,	it gives supe~b tr~mlOg in mental concentration.	It makes for delight 10 au- dacity, the companion of brisk resolution; for ability
knowledge the valuable gifts that 1 send, causes the blunders of political scientists to be bellowed forth in mY,hearing by fools. The great Chanakya is right in saymg: 'We love the sympathetic mischief-worker;
we hate the unsympathizing benefactor.' " , "Yet what can I do? Despite his waywardness, I cannot abandon this king, my king by generations
of inheritance. Yet not abandoning him, what benefit can I confer, when my words go unheeded? Surely, this realm wil1 fall a prey to Vasantebhanu,	lord of Ashm~ka, who knows his political science. I only hope t~at disasters, when they come, will bring our king to hIS senses. Though misfortunes, among their disa-
greeable consequences, may also produce hatred,
~til1,.since honest conduct does not please him, let the
l~:vltable misfortune come. If I can bridle my rna-
licious tongue, I may somehow keep my footing at court."
" 'While the counselor was in this mood and the king ~as flirting, Chandrapalita arrived, son of In- drapalita, counselor of the lord of Ashmaka. He had been exiled by his father for loose living, and came at- tended by numerous bands of musicians, by crafts-
w~me.n o~ no mean skill, and by many menials and spies 10 disguise. With such an assortment of diver- sions he captured Viharabhadra, and so bridged the gap to the king.
" 'Whenever he found an opening, he would white-
210
THE TEN PRlNCES
VISHRUTA'S ADVENTURE
to hold one's own while rubbing up with the toughest customers;	for the cultivation	of self-reliance;	for get- ting a living without stinginess.
" '''Or again, take the society of good-looking girls. That makes money and virtue worth having. That means genuine manly pride; skill in thought- reading; conduct untainted by sordid greed; training in all the social arts; quickness of wit and speech be- cause you must be forever devising means to get what you lack, to keep what you get, to enjoy what you keep, to dream of what you enjoy, to pacify the pee-
vish, and so on; public deference for your well- groomed person and stunning clothes; social accepta- bility; great respect from servants; smiling address; dignity; gallantry; the winning, through children, of salvation on earth and salvation in heaven.
" , "Then again, take alcohol. This fortifies the charm of youth through steady use of spirituous anti- dotes to numerous diseases. It neutralizes ali misfor- tunes by increasing self-esteem. It kindles sexual de- sire and improves the capacity for pleasure. It drowns the consciousness of sin, so counteracting
morbidity. By removing the fetters of reticence, it conduces to mutual confidence. By repressing envy, it makes for pure joy. It encourages continual enjoy- ment of music and other sense-impressions; the acqui- sition of countless and varied friendships; unrivaled beauty of person; unparaIIeled graces; martial spirit, resulting from the Joss of fear and depression.
" '''Beneficial	also, on occasion, are scurrility, cruelty, and spoliation of goods. For a king is not a hermit, subduing the six enemies to bask in religious peace, nor can he be held to commonplace morality."
" 'So the poor king adopted these opinions, like the counsels of a teacher, with the greatest respect; while his ministers, imitating him, embraced vicious courses without restraint. And as all were equally self- indulgent, no man investigated another's delinquency.
"'Since king and ministers behaved alike, the bureaucrats consumed the profits of their own labors, thus slowly drying up the sources of revenue, while their master's expenditures increased daily; for he
was subservient to gay dogs. His confidence was in- creased by finding a community of tastes in the vas- sals, prominent citizens, and district leaders to who~, with their wives, he issued invitations for alcoholic
conoersaziones.	He found them ready to transgress convention and took liberties with the ladies on any pretext; while they, abating their reverence for co~rt ladies who met them half way, indulged in many fiir- rations .
.. 'Presently	all the ladies of the land, finding in- delicacy easy and pleasant, broke the bonds of de- corum; they did not care a straw for their h.usbands as they listened to the proposals of crowding lovers.
.	I d Th	trong killed the Passionate squabbles resu tee.	e s
weak. Thieves stole the wealth of the wealth~ ".The
. fdfntedCitizens paths of crime were ree an reque .
211
212	THE TEN PRINCES
whose kinsfolk were slain, whose property was plun- dered, who were sick of slaughter and bondage, loosed their throats in sobbing lamentation. Unjust punish- ments begot fear and wrath. Greed stalked through impoverished households. The self-respecting flamed with humiliated pride. Treasons flowed from all these wrongs.
" 'Then poisoners and other plotters, in the pay of the lord of Ashmaka, destroyed Anantavarman's picked soldiers and debilitated his army by many de- vices. Dressed as hunters, they enticed men by stories of abundant game into ravines without exit, then set fire to the dry grass and bamboo clumps at the en- trance. They urged the killing of tigers and other wild beasts, then helped the beasts to kill them. They enlisted deadly hunger and thirst against men led far astray by desire for the water of some choice well.
They led rough chases that caused falls from cliffs on treacherous slopes covered with grass and brush. They drew thorns from feet with poison-tipped knives; they made easy prey of stragglers, striving in- dividually to rejoin a scattered troop. Others they shot with arrows, pretending to mistake them for deer; or dared them to scale rugged heights, and pushed them off with no witnesses; or disguised them- selves as men of the jungle to overpower small bands in a thicket. They forced others into brawls at gam~ bling matches, cockfights, festivals, and the like; made them injure each other; fomented secret un-
VISHRUTA'S ADVENTURE
2IJ
pleasan tnesses, then published the resulting insults before witnesses, thus compelling duels to conceal dis- honor. Attaching themselves in the guise offriends to
others' wives, they suggested acts of violence aimed at lovers, husbands, or both. They seduced some with fit females, lurking at the rendezvous and bursting out with damning evidence. Some they induced to enter caves, to dig for treasure, to practice magic, at- tributing their death to the difficulties of the job.
They would persuade men to mount must elephants, meanwhile suppressing precautions; or, on some wild wager, excite a rogue elephant against a picked troop. They assassinated those who quarreled over a dona- tion, casting the blame on the disputants; they se- cretly smote those .who abused vassal cities or dis- tricts, and proclaimed the names of personal enemies.
They spread debilitating disease by encouraging con- stant indulgence with that kind of female; they skil- fully rubbed poison on garments, ornaments, gar- lands, and salves; they fostered sickness in the name
of medicine. "'Then Vasantabhanu instigated Bhanuvarman,
lord ofVanavasi ,to make war on Anantavarman, who mobilized for offense the moment his boundary was violated.	Of all his vassals, the first to arrive and the most welcome was the lord of Ashmaka. When the
others gathered, they made a short march, encamping on the bank of the Nerbudda.
" 'At this juncture,	the king summoned a girl in
THE TEN PRINCES
the train of a powerful vassal, the lord of Kuntala; she was dancer to the person of His Majesty of Avan- ti, was called "the human sylph," and was highly ex- tolled by Chandrapalita	and others for terpsichorean talent. On seeing her dance, he fell in love, made her drunk, and abused her.
H 'Then the lord of Ashmaka whispered to the lord of Kuntala: "This wanton king outrages our wives. What measure of humiliation must we endure? I have a hundred elephants; you have five hundred. Let us join forces, and speak a quiet word to the lord of Mu- rala, Virasena; also to Ekavira, lord of Richika; to
Kumaragupta, lord of Konkana; and to Nagapala, ruler of Sasikya. They will infallibly resent his in- solence and fall in with our plan. Besides) this lord of Vanavasi is a dear friend of mine. We will let him en- gage our blackguard in front) while we attack from the rear. And we will divide the treasure and ani- mals,"
" 'Receiving joyful assent) he made up parcels as gifts-twenty	fine garments) twenty-five portions of gold, saffron, and blankets-chose	a fit go-between, came to an understanding	with the vassals mentioned, and won them to his plan. For these vassals and for
the lord of Vanavasi, Anantavarman next day be- came mincemeat, because he despised political science. .. 'Now Vasantabhanu,	having set his own guards over the chaotic booty of treasure and animals, made this insidious proposal to all his confederates:	"Di-
VISHRUTA'S ADVENTURE
vide the spoil in proportion to your exertions and your contributions of force. I shall be content with any fragment you may allot." Thus he baited all the vassals into a ruinous squabble, and himself swal- lowed the whole plunder. After bestowing a petty fraction on the lord of Vanavasi, he faced about and reduced the entire realm of Anantavarman.
"'In this posture of affairs, the aged counselor Vasurakshita,	with the help of certain hereditary serv- ants of the monarchy, contrived to escape with the lad Bhaskaravarman	(whom you see here), with his elder sister) the thirteen-year old Manjuvadini, and with their mother, Queen Vasundhara. The counse- lor, foreseeing the inevitable disaster, perished by an inflammatory fever; but certain friends (of whom 1 was one) conducted the queen and the royal children to the city Mahishmati and presented them to Mitra- varman, her consort's half-brother .
.. 'This scoundrel fancied her as loose as himself; and when she repulsed him) he heartlessly strove to kill this lad, imagining that she preserved her honor only to keep her son f t for the succession. When the queen understood the situation, she besought me thus:	"Father	Nalijanghe,	wherever you have to put him) save my boy's life) and your own. If my life is preserved, 1 will follow. And when you are secure) send me a message."
" 'I managed to spirit him away from the muddle at court and plunged into the Vindhya forest. 1 gave
216	THE TEN PRINCES
him a few days' rest in a herdsmen's hamlet-for	we traveled on foot-but	fearing a descent of the king's agents even there, made a further long journey. Then, when dreadful thirst distressed him, I tried to give him water but stumbled and fell into this well, where you were so kind to me. Henceforth, sir, pray help this helpless prince.' And he bowed respectfully.
"Now when I inquired concerning the mother's origin, he told me: 'His mother was born to Kusu- madhanvan, lord of Kosala, and Sagaradatta, daugh- ter of Vaishravana, a merchant of Patna.' 'In that case,' said I, 'his mother and my father had the same maternal grandfather.' And I embraced him tender- ly. Then the old gentleman asked which of the sons of Sindhudatta was my father, and showed great de- light at hearing the name of Sushruta. Thereupon I engaged to destroy the arrogant usurper by adopting his own political tricks, and to re-establish the lad in his paternal inheritance; but the more pressing anxi- ety was the alleviation of his hunger.
«At this moment two deer flashed past, and a hun- ter who had missed them with three arrows. Snatch- ing from his hand his remaining two arrows and the bow, I shot. One arrow pierced beyond the feather, the other not so far; but both deer fell dead. One I gave to the hunter; the other] scraped, cleaned, skinned, and cut up, then spitted the quarters, neck, and other parts over the coals of a bonfire, and satisfied
VISHRUTA'S ADVENTURE
217
the hunger of my two companions and myself with roast venison.
"The barbarian was greatly tickled by my smart- ness in this business, and 1 asked him: 'Do you hap- pen to know any news from Mahishmati?' '1 left the city today,' he replied, 'after selling tiger skins and leather goods. You can wager I know. Chandavar-
man's	younger	brother	Prachandavarman	is coming to make a proposal to Manjuvadini, Anantavarman's daughter, and the city is set for a holiday.'
"Then I whispered my aged friend: 'That knavish Mitravarman	is trying to win the mother's confidence by honorable conduct toward the daughter, through whom he will draw the boy back in order to kill him. Therefore return, give the queen secret assurance of the lad's welfare and of my existence, but lament in
public that the young prince has been eaten by a tiger. That traitor, inwardly delighted, will express insin- cere sympathy for the queen; whereupon you will bear him this message from her: "The boy for whose sake I opposed your purpose, has for my sins departed this life. Today I am ready to receive your orders," This will please him and cause him to co-operate.
.. 'Then she must dip a garland in water holding the deadly vatsanabha poison in solution and lay it o.n his chest and face with the conjuring spell: "May this become a sword-thrust if you are a sinner and I a faithful wife." This will prove fatal. Next, she must
THE TEN PRINCES
drop this antidote in the water, dip the garland, and give it to her own daughter. When he dies and the girl is unaffected, the citizens will say: "She is a faith- ful wife)" and will follow her lead.
" 'Then she must send a message to Prachanda- varman: "This realm lacks a leader. You should ap- propriate it, and this maiden too." Meanwhile, the boy and I, disguised as grim ascetics, will dwell beside the cemetery outside the city, awaiting alms from the queen's own hand.
" 'At this point, let the queen make a secret com-
munication to staid, respectable citizens and chosen
counselors: "The Vindhya-dwelling goddess visited
me in the night with gracious power of vision. Four
days from now, Prachandavarman	will die. On the
fifth day, a certain Brahman youth, if he finds her
shrine on the bank of the Reva empty, will-after	all
worshipers have withdrawn-fling	wide the door and
come forth with my son. He will guard this kingdom
and make my son its ruler. The boy is meanwhile held
hidden by the goddess, who has assumed the form of a
tigress. And dear little Manjuvadini is the destined
bride of the Brahman youth. All must remain a pro-
found secret among you until these things come to pass." ,
''The old gentleman joyfully approved, and start- ed; events followed as planned. And gossip spread in widening circles: 'What wonderful power have faith- ful wives! One touch from a garland proved a sword-
VISHRUTA'S ADVENTURE
thrust for him. And you can't possibly say there was any trick in the business, because the very same wreath, given to her daughter, looked beautiful on her breast, didn't kill her at all. Anyone who disobeys this faithful wife, will just turn to ashes.'
"Now when the queen beheld her son and me ap- proaching, in grim ascetic garb, to receive alms, her breasts grew moist as she rose to greet us, and her voice broke with joy as she said: 'Receive my rever- ence, holy sir, and relieve my helplessness. To me it is all a dream. Is it true, or not?' 'Results will show,' said I, 'no later than today.' And she replied: 'If so, your handmaid is blest indeed. For the drear.npro~~ ised her a protector.' And she bade Manjuvadini bow, while the girl's shy demeanor betra!ed her pleas: ure at the sight of me. 'If you are playing me false, continued the queen in happy mood, 'tomorrow 1 shall have to punish this hermit lad of yours.' 'Very well,' said I with a smile, and accepted her alms; but my manhood melted as my glances led to an absorb- ing passion for Manjuvadini.
"I summoned Nalijangha; and as he followed me forth, I quietly inquired: 'Where is that rogue Pra- chandavarman,	whose speedy doom has been ~re- dieted?' And he replied: 'Quite certain that the king- dam is his he is in the royal reception hall, where ac- tors fawn' upon him.' 'Then wait in the gar~en,'. I bade my venerable friend; deposited my trapp.mgs 10 an empty cell by its wall; and engaged the prmce to
220	THE TEN PRINCES
guard them. I myself assumed the costume of a pro- fessional entertainer and went to amuse Prachanda- varman.
"At the hour when the sun's rays redden, I pre- sented a vaudeville program adapted to the mentality of the gathering-dance,	song, assorted pathos, and the like; hand-waving, foot-flourishing, and high kick- ing; th~scorpion wiggle, the crocodile waddle, and the
VISHRUTA'S ADVENTURE
221
fish twitch. Next, I snatched knives from the nearest .'
pursuit. Now previously I had devised a nook for con- cealment in the shrine of the goddess, in the very base of the statue; its entrance was hidden by slabs of stone movable from the side.
«Then as the dark night glided by, the lad and I attired ourselves in silken garments brought by eu- nuchs and adorned with priceless gems; entered there; and remained without a sound. The queen had on the previous day given the fire-sacrament with fitting cer- emony to Prachandavarman	of Malwa and had re- ported to Chandavarman	that his death was due to a treacherous trick of the lord of Ashmaka. This day at dawn she came with the respectable citizens, counse-
lors) and vassals previously bidden to the rendezvous) and worshiped the blessed goddess. Before all these witnesses she proved the shrine empty by investiga- ting every recess; then stood at gaze with the crowd, while a shrill drum-beat gave the signal.
"The signaling sound trickled through a tiny crack; I applied my head to the iron pedestal carrying the image and) gripping it with both hands) swung one side over-a	task to tax the energy of a muscular man. Then I emerged with the young prince.
"I replaced the grim goddess) flung wide the door, and made my appearance) addressing the citizens who fell flat with glances of glad conviction, with visi- ble thrills) with lifted hands and mounting astonish- ment: 'The Vindhya-dwelling goddess thus enjoins you through my lips: "1 mercifully took the form of a
disposed them about my person, and exhibited certain spectacular and scientific specialties, such as the hawk swoop and the osprey dive. Then I hurled a knife a distance of a hundred and twenty feet, striking Prachandavarman in the chest, while I bellowed: 'May Vasantabhanu live a thousand years.' A merce- nary Aourish.ed his sword to cut me down; I leaped on the h~mp. his shoulder made) easily paralyzing him and widening the excited eyes of the crowd; then at a bound I tqok the twelve-foot wall.
"My first word on landing in the garden was: 'Here ~s the visible track of my companions';	for the foot?rmts ~ere not obliterated in the sand leveled by Nalijangha 5 steps. So I hurried to the east along the wall by the alley of tarnal trees) then ran to the south w~ere my trail was lost among scattered heaps of bricks, leaped the encircling moat of the rampart	and ~arted into the empty cell. Here I assumed m;ear- her.garb and returned with the prince to the cemetery) while the court) agog at my exploit) was hesitant in
222	THE TEN PRINCES
tigress to conceal this lad, whom today I restore to you. From today you must receive him as my son, the fondling of no heedless mother."	Furthermore) you are to consider me his protector, whose ambition it is to shatter that pot which is Ashmaka-the	cruel lord whose false heart is betrayed by his very skill in devising uncounted guileful wiles. As the wages of this protection, the holy goddess graciously grants me the lad's sweet-faced sister.'
"At this the people cried with delight: 'Blest is Bhoja's dynasty, receiving you as its chief from the holy goddess.' My mother-in-law attained a state of ineffable bliss, and that very day gave me Manjuva- dini's blossom-hand with all due ceremony.
"Under cover of night I completely plugged the nook beneath the statue, so that searchers found no cranny for hiding. The people indulged in gossip that made them forget their meals and was enriched with invented details; they inferred that a spirit of divinity d wel t	in	me;	and	my	word	became	law.	They	be- stowed on the prince the title 'Son of the holy god- dess,' and this became a source of prestige.	On an aus- picious day I clothed him brilliantly and had the chaplain perform the rite of investiture' ,I let the lad
learn political science, while I attended to the details of government.
"Then I reRected: 'The realm is indeed docile to the three factors of power, while the factors-wise planning, prestige, and energy-so	dovetail as to ac-
VISHRUTA'S ADVENTURE
223
complish results. Our ambitions are defined by wise planning, set in motion by prestige, brought to a hap- py issue by energy. Now the tree of government- whose fivefold root is wise planning, whose double stem is prestige, whose four branches are energy, whose seventy-two leaves are the counselors, whose six twigs are the six expedients, whose flower is power, and the fruit, success-should	benefit its governor. But so wide are its ramifications that one needs a companion for full exploitation. Now Aryaketu, Mi- travarman's	counselor, having his origin in Kosala, is loyal to the prince's mother and possesses the qualities of a counselor. Through contempt of his advice, Mi- travarman came to grief. If he could be secured, it would be a blessing.'
"So I summoned Nalijangha and gave him secret instructions: 'Father, put this question privately to noble Aryaketu:	"Who is this mystery man that en- joys the glory of our kingdom? You know the snake has caught our young prince. Will he spew him out or swallow him?" Then convey his answer to me.'
"Presently he brought me this report: '1 waited upon him with frequent gifts, skilfully beat about the bush, stroked his hands and feet, then in a moment of perfect confidence questioned him in the fashion dic- tated by you. And he made answer: "My very dear sir, you are much mistaken.	This man gives evidence of pure aristocratic descent, unrivaled penetration, superhuman vigor, measureless nobility, miraculous
THE TEN PRINCES
skill with weapons, no mean acquaintance with the
arts, a benevolent spirit, and a majesty irresistible to
his enemies. In him converge virtues, elsewhere hard-
ly to be discovered individually. To his foes he is a
upas, to the loyal a sandal tree: witness his supplant-
ing of pedantic Ashmaka, and the restitution of our
prince to his paternal dominion. Depend upon it,
CHAPTER XIV CONCLUSION
"And I reflected: 'My subordinates, without ex- ception, are most valorous and so devoted to me as not to care a straw for their lives in comparison with my command. With the total armies of two king- doms at my back, I am not inferior to Vasantabhanu, lord of Ashmaka, and I hold the advantage in politi- cal science. I am therefore competent to conquer Va- santabhanu and to establish in his paternal inherit- ance Bhaskaravarman,	son of Anantavarman,	sover- eign of Vidarbha. Besides, the rumor springs up everywhere that this prince is the adopted son of the holy goddess and that I am his deputed companion. Even yet no man knows that this is a consequence of my craft. Now our partisans have confidence in this prince Bhaskaravarmnn,	believing that he, the son of their righ tful lord Anan ravarman, will gain this king- dom through the grace of the holy goddess; while,the army of the lord of Ashmaka, realizing that the prmce enjoys the favor of the goddess, and that human pow- er is no match for power divine, has little stomach for a fight with us.
If 'Again, our hereditary counselors, desirous from the first of the prince's elevation, and now secure? by gifts and honors from me, show a peculiar enthuslasm
'"
. ".
sir.
"Even after this, I tested the man by a number of traps before familiarizing him with my design. With his friendly aid I selected truthful, incorruptible counselors and spies diversely disguised. Learning from these that the whole realm was avaricious of wealth, very uppish, and intractable, I publicly ex- tolled generosity; exalted piety; confounded heretics; cleaned up prickly enemies; baffled the stratagems of
foes; settled the four castes in their several duties; de- termined to replenish the treasury, since the best measures of regulation are dependent on money, and there is nothing more fatal than weakness in that de-
•
partment.
Such were my principles of government."
THE TEN PRINCES
for the prince. On the other hand, reliable emissaries
of mine have, at my command, greatly gained upon
the intimate servants of the lord of Ashmaka and have	,
CONCLUSION
own kingdom, permeated by disaffection. Hence, be- fore it comes to a dissension with my troops, whose wavering betrays my own uncertainty, I will employ them in war; in that case, he will be obliged to give me a brief interview.'	With this in mind, impelled to the crime of unmotivated	invasion, he marched with his army against us, and into the jaws of death.
"Apprised of his approach, the prince led our van; while I mounted a horse and rode straight at the lord of Ashmaka.	Thereupon	his entire army drew the in- ference that there could be but one unique explana- tion for the charge of a single man against so limitless a host-namely,	the guardian favor of the goddess; and they stood stock still like painted pictures. I singled out Vasantabhanu and challenged him to combat· • he faced me and fetched a stout blow with his sword. Parrying this with particular skill, I coun- tered; and as his severed head dropped on the ground, I shouted to his army: 'Let any who still desire to fight, step forward and fight with me. If not? let all fall at the feet of the prince and become hIS men. Thereafter	undiminished	in livelihood, securely pur- suing their several avocations, let them dwell in peace.'
"Without delay or exception, all servants of the lord of Ashmaka clambered from their mounts, fell be- fore the prince, and became subservient to him. I in- stalled him as lord of the kingdom of Ashmaka, con- firmed the hereditary functionaries in their offices,
insinuated this quiet word: "You are our friends,
hence have a right to hear from us what is profitable.
If any side with Vasantabhanu, lord of Ashmaka, in
dividing the prince from his companion, the famous
Vishruta, deputed by the goddess herself, and fight
with him, they too wil1 become guests of the death-
god. So long as the lord of Ashmaka adopts no hostile
measures, you will follow Bhaskaravarman,	son of
Anantavarman. Thus the lord of Ashmaka may
dismiss alarms and live in peace and prosperity with
his people. Otherwise, he will fall a victim to the tri-
dent of the holy goddess. Inform all, once for all, of
the commands the goddess lays upon me. We feel a
sincere friendship for you, so long as all abide by our bidding." ,
"Upon hearing this, the intimate servants of the lord of Ashmaka, who already realized that the prince was the nursling of the goddess, were shaken in al- legiance. And since the message came from me, they fell decidedly under my influence.
"Now the lord of Ashmaka, becoming familiar with all these circumstances, reflected: 'All the he- reditary subjects of the prince desire him as their sov- ereign; while my servants, remote and intimate, seem shaken in allegiance. If then I remain at horne, rely- ing on leniency, I shall be unable to guard even my
,
,
228	THE TEN PRJ CES
and appropriated the army of the lord of Ash.maka. With it I proceeded to Vidarbha, anointed Prince Bhaskaravarman in the capital city, and set him in the place of his fathers.
"One day, when the king was with his mother Va, sundhara, I said respectfully: 'I desire to undertake a certain task. Until it is performed I can nowhere re- main at ease. Pray permit my wife, your sister Man- juvadini, to dwell a few days with you. I wish to wan- der for a space of time, seeking one 1 love; when that person is found, I wi1J return.'
"Now the king asked his mother's permission be- fore replying: 'You, sir, are the unique cause of our wonderful success, evidenced in the winning of this kingdom. Without you we cannot for a moment bear the burden of this ki.ngdom. How can you make such a proposal?'
"But I replied: 'You need not cherish a. grain of anxiety.	In your palace is the pearl of counselors) Arya- ketu, capable of bearing the burden of several such kingdoms. ] will put him in charge before departing.' Though plied with much such argument) the king and his mother delayed my departure some little time with acts of affectionate insistence. Incidentally, he gave me the kingdom of Prachandavarman,	overlord of Utkala.
"When] had settled that government, ] bade my young king farewell and began my journey in search of you) sir. But being summoned by Simhavarman)
•
CCONCLUSION
the Anga monarch) to succor him) I came hither) where whatever good I ever did, had rich reward. For here I met my master."
Hereafter, theprinces there assembled-c-Apahara., varman, Upaharavarrnan, Arthapala, Pramari, Mi- tragupta, Mantragupta, and Vishruta-sent servants to summon Prince Somadatta, who was enjoying the position of crown prince in Patalipura and who, with his bride Vamalochana, was awaiting the invitation. Then all, in the companionship of Rajavahana, told tales in mutually pleasing union until from Blossom City came a dispatch sent by King Rajahansa. With this in hand, the gathered princes bowed before Ra-
javahana, saying: "Your Majesty, receive this dis- patch of your father, Rajahansa."	He rose, bowed re- peatedly with deep respect, and received the dispatch before these witnesses.
Then Prince Rajavahana laid the letter on his brow, lowered it, broke the seal, and read in the hear- ing of aU: "Blessings and benedictions. Given from Blossom City, our capital. King Rajahansa greets Rajavahana and the other princes sojourning in the city of Champa and sends these directions in writing.
When you bade us a dutiful farewell and set forth on your journey, we established our residence in a forest glade by Shiva's shrine. Thither returned the army, reporting that Rajnvahana had withdrawn by night to a shrine of Shiva in order to worship the god; that
-------
I I
03°
THE TEN PRINCES
CONCLUSION	03'
all the other princes have vanquished many doughty foes, have completed the conquest of the quarters, have subdued the earth, and are united in Champa. Send speedy couriers with dispatches to recall them.'
"I hearkened to the words of the holy sage and have sent this dispatch to summon you. If you delay a moment more, you will hear that I and Vasumati, your mother. are but a tale remembered. Realizing
this. drink only water on your journey." So they laid their sire's dispatch on their brows
and determined to go. They determined also to assign adequate forces to the guarding of the conquered kingdoms and to appoint to every office a fit and com- petent functionnry ; further. to secure their line of march with proper detachments, to defeat their initial enemy. Manasara of Mnlwa, annexing his kingdom
also. and then to bow in Blossom City before the feet of King Rajahansa and Queen Vasumati. So. taking their wives. they marched with a picked force against the monarch of Malwa. And Rajavahana, surrounded by companion princes. the moment he reached Ujjain,
straightway defeated and slew-despite his might- Manasara, monarch ofMalwa. He recovered Princess Avantisundari, freed Prince Pushpodbhava with his household from the prison where he was kept by the counsel of Chandnvnrman, and with his aid settled
the kingdom of Mnlwa, appointing certain statesmen a~d soldiers to guard it. With the remainder of their picked army the princes came home to Blossom City
aU the remaining princes, failing to find him !o the morning, had vowed to bow with Rajavahana before
Rajahansa	or to die, and had scattered. "When we learned your story from the lips of the
soldiers returning thence, your mother and I, two hearts sunk in a sea of unendurable sorrow, deter- mined to visit Vamadeva's hermitage and, having made him acquainted with these events, to leave life
behind. But when we arrived and bowed before him, our purpose was already known to that holy sage, to whom past, present, and future are revealed. Dis-
cerning our determination, he spoke: '0 King, all your purpose is already known, through the power of divine insight. These princes of yours, having for Ra- javahana's	sake suffered sorrow for a season, will then. through turn of fate and matchless valor. complete the conquest of the quarters. They will win many kingdoms and at the end of sixteen years will return
in the train of Raja va han a victorious. to fall prone be- fore you and Vasumati and to perform your com- mands. For their sake therefore you must dare no
desperate deed.' "Trusting the holy sage's word, the queen and 1
have fortified our hearts and drawn breath until this day. Now when the limit drew near. 1 visited Va- madeva's hermitage and spoke respectfully: 'My lord, the limit set by you is near at hand. Is further intelli-
gence in your mind today?' "The holy sage replied: '0 King. Rajavahana and
\
\
\
']'	THE TEN PRINCES	CONCLUSION
']]
and there-r-Rajavahana leading-adored the feet of
Rajahansa and of their mother, Vasumati. These two,
on winning back their sons, Edt their happiness com- plete.
Then, in the presence of the king and of Vasumati the queen, Varnadeva, penetrating the longing of the ten princes, said to them: "Depart now together and rule in righteousness, each his own kingdom. But when desire awakens, then return to bow low at your parents' feet." So all the princes, receiving with rever-
ence the command of the sage, bowed before him and
their parents; went and paraded the conquered
world; then returned and related, in the sage's pres-
ence, each his own tale. And the parents, hearing
those most ingenious adventures testifying to the na-
~ive valor of their lads, experienced the extremity of JOy.
Then the king deferentially addressed the sage: "Holy sir, through your grace we have attained a bliss surpassing human wishes, beyond the range of
speech or thought. Henceforth it befits me to live a forest hermit at my teacher's feet, aiming at full pos- session of my soul. Pray ordain that Rajavahana be anointed ruler over the kingdom of Blossom City and over Manasara's realm; that the remaining kingdoms be severally assigned to the nine princes; that these princes, obeying Rajavahana yet in perfect amity,
pluck all thorny rivals and take joy in the earth who wears the four seas as a girdle."
And the sage, perceiving the lads insistent to dis- suade their sire from embracing the hermit life, said to them: "My princely lads, your father treads the path becoming to his years. In my hermitage he will lead his pious life with no hardship. Pray do not dis- suade him. For there he will win the grace of God. Nor would you be always happy in your father's house." They bowed to the holy bidding and ceased their insistence.
So Rajavahana was established in Blossom City; and all his comrades, with his consent, governed their several kingdoms, coming and going at will to greet their parents. Thus settled, all the princely lads, righteously ruling-under Rajavahana's command- the circle of earth's lands, in amity perfectly recipro-
cated, delighted in kingly joys that gods can scarce attain.
Anantakir'ti,	IImerchant
'7'
in tfjjain,
Ap print'q, 14-
a
h
irtn.r'mln.
J DEX OF PROPER NAMES
Achi' fa varl, queen of Prince Chan, daghosha, 140
Ag,'sty ... an ancient sage, '30
Aha'1yi, • woman beloved by Indra, H
Aryake'tu,	• statesman,	'1:3 !\sh'malu, I vassal kingdom, '108 At'ri, In ancient sage. 7+
Avan'o, I portion of the kiltgdom of Malw., 4-4
Avanrisun'dari.	the belle of Avan- ti, and bride of Rajavahana,	4S
Ba'!&, a (.bled demon, 10'] BaJabha'dra, the husband of Rat.
navllti, '73 BillChll.ll'driki, the bride of Push-
podbhavll,39 BlI.n'dhumll.ti, the name of Kanti-
mati in another birth, 131 B:a.ndhupi1a, father of Chandn--
rala, 38
Benl'res, the modem name of the city Varanasi, or Kashi, 67
Am!->i1ik..i, prineesa kingdom, 6'1
of	the	Anga
AnllMasi'ra, '" partisan of the true king of Videha, 1'l3
Ananuvu'mlU1, a king who is ruined by evil ceonsel, 200
An'dhra, name of. country, 190 An'ga, I kingdom, 6'1 Anginva.r'lha,	I coun~lor,136 An'girasa, an authority on ethics,
one of the: ten
"'"
Arhan'tiki, a Buddhist nun, 178 Armadi'lll, the father of Kosha-
du ... 158
Arthapi'!.., one of the ten princa ,6 •
Bhit'glVII., II. name assumed by Thorny, 178
BhiJIkanvar'mlln,	prince of Vi- dubha, 'lIS
Bhimadhan'van, prince of the Sch, rna country,	'S8
Bh01a, founder of a famous dy- nlSty, 199
Ar'thapui, I wholetale rntrchlnt _ in Champa, b
Aryadi'.i, the name of Scmedevi ie another birth, 131
'3'
Bhinuvar'man, vui, '113
the lord of VlI.lIa-
236	THE TEN PRINCES
Brah'ma, a great god, one of the Dharmapa'la, a counselor of King tri ni ty, xvi	Rajahansa,	3
Brihas'pati, the professor in heav, Dh:rnnarak'shiti, a Buddhist nun,
I DEX OF PROPER NAMES	237
Kili (6rsd, a goddess, wife of Kuberadu'u, :I merchant In Shiva, 6	Champa, 8'1
Ki'li (IoeCOndl,the wife of S:ttya- Kumiiragup'ta, lord of Kcnkana,
'"
en,74
Cham'pa, capital of the Anga kingdom, 6:1
Chi'nakya, an authority on polirl, cal science, 203
Chandagho'sha, brother-in-law of the king of Benares, IJ:l
Chandasi'mha, king of Benares,
regent of Malwa,
8.
Dharmavar'dhana, vasti, 148
vuman,17 Kalindavar'man,
king of Shra-
king of Assam, Kilin'di, the bride of M:ltanga, '15
Kun't:l..la, a vllS$alkingdom, 1.14 Kusumadhan'van,	lord of Kosala,
Kalin'ga, name of III country, 18S Kalpasun'dari, the bride of Upaha-
L11i'nti, queen of King Chanda_ eimha, 140
".
ravarman, 109 Kimaman'jari,	a gay girl, 69 Kiman'dalci, a writer on ethics, 18 Uipamud'ri, wife of the sage
Agastya, 130 Kanakale'khi, the bride of Man_ Miidhll.vase'ni, mother of Kama,
tragupta,	I S6	manjari,89 Kana'kavati, the daughter of a MlI'dhumllo, name of I. ciry, 173
Chandavar'man,
Kimapi'la,	son of Dharmapala,	3
,0
Gau'ri, the wife of Satyavarman, Chandrapa'la, a friend of Push. '7
podbhava,38
Chandrapa'lita,	a gay dog, 208
Chandrase'na. a maiden beloved by Koshadasa, 158
Chitragup'ta, counselor of the death-god, :13
Damalip'ta, the capital of the Suhma country, 157
Dan'daka.	name of a forest,:14 Dan'din, the author of the Ten
Prinas, vii Darpuii'ra.	IOn of King Manasara,
3.
Diruvar'man, a lover of Baja.. chandrika, 40
Da'sha--kumi'ra_cha'rita, the Ai_ om/UTes oj lhe Tm PrillCls, title of the book
Go'mini, II good wife, 166 Grihagup'ta, a ship captain, father
of Ratoavati,	173
Hansi'vali, the name ofSulochana in another birth, 131
Harishchan'dra,	a mythical king, 9 Hima'laya, a gn:at mountain sys-
merchant in Valabhi, 175 Kin'chi, name of a city, 168 Kanduki'vati,	the bride of Mlea,
gupta, I S8 Kin'taka,	a jailer,	96 Kin'tUnali,	prinCCS5 of
Ma'gadha, the kingdom of King Rajahansa, 1
Mahiki.'la,	a shrine of Shiv a, 6 Mihi'shmati, name of. ciry, ~15 Mal'I"ll., the modem form of the
Sal1$krit "Mi'lava,"	a kingdom,
chief	ooun9Clor	of Minasii'ra, king of M:l..Iwa,3
Minasave'ga,	II fairy, 6,. Mi'navati, mother orQuecn Kal.
pasundari, 113 Man'dara, a mythical rnO\lnt:l.in, I Miin'galiki, nul'3C of Princess
Ambalika,98 Manibha'dra, a Yaksha demigod,
"
hou.'leholder Dhanami'tra, Il friend of Apaharll- KiJagup'ta, a merchant in Kaliya.
~hnika.r'niki,	the bride of Artha- pala, 1,.0
r.h.njuvii'dini, me bride of Vi_ shruta, '115
Mantragup'ta, one of the te.n princes, 10
Dhu'mini, a callous-hearted wom- an,l66
Dhun'yaka, a man ill rewarded for kindness to his wife, 166
£kavi'ra, lord of Richika, '114 £najan'gha,	a courier, 6'1
'"
,,' La'ta, a kingdom, 'l9
tem, '24 Hiranyaka'.hipu,
Bc:nares, ". 3
a devil, 57 lkahvi'ku,	a fairy king, 64
Kar'dana, the king of the Kalinga country, 186
Ki'sha, a white-80wering gr:w, I Ki'shi, the ancient name of
Bcnal'Cl,I'17
Kauti'lYI, a writer on political science, 18
Kaveri, a river, 16
Kha'nlti, a G~k tradcr, 1'13
Kirtisi'ra, prince of Mal"",a, 6)
Kon'kana, a v... a1 kingdom, '114
Ko'ula, name of a kingdom, '116
K5shadi'llI, a friend of Mitra. &uptt, 158
Kube'ra, a god, lord of the Yakaha demigoda, 130
Minapi'l:l, Virakctu,3°
Dha'naka,	a wealthy 166
In'dra, II god, king of heaven,s Indrapi'lita, counsdor of the lord
of Ashmaka, 2.08 Indra.se'ni, I lady at the COUrt of
Benarcs, 131
jayasi'mha,	king of the Andhra country, 190
' Dhan'yaka, a wealthy householder, KiJaya'vana, a land beyond the
Klili'sa, a peak in the Himalaya, I vana, 14
varman,67 ,66	xa, 14
-
''''
Sigaraclat'ti, the mother 01 Queeo sbruta, ']16
THE TEN PRINCES Panehila.shar'mao,	a gay old gen.
Rat'nlV1ld I wife _ho re<X/vel'll her husband'. affection, 173
Ratn6d'bhava	lIOO 01 Padmod bhllva. 3
Re'yi, a ri..er, now called "Ner- bcdde," 218
Rkhi1ta, a v_a	kIngdom, ']14 Rid'dhlmlti,	a silvet.hai~	chap.
eron, 140 Sa'gara, the father oj sixf)' thou·
aand BOn!I who dug down 1.0 hell tee
'39 ';hult'ra, an authoriry on c:thja
Shilrul'na,	name 01 a countTy, In ""
Sbiirl$l'nl,	the name 01Su\ochUla
Mari'chi, l\ holy man who has an	tleman, 155 experience with a gay girl, 69	Para'shara, an ancient sage, 74
Markande'ya, an eminent sage, 6,. Patna, the modern name of the
Mican'ga, a Brahman who be- comes king of the lower world, '1'1
Ma'thura,	name of a city, In Mattakii'la, king of Lata, '19
10 another SimhaghO'.ha
b,rth	IJI (first),
MC'dini, queen of the Suhma Prahil1lvar'man, king of Videhll country, 158
Mi'thila, a city. capital of Videha, Mitragup'u, one of the ten
"
Praji'pati, a great god, 74
Pra'mari, one of the ten prin~5, 10
Priyam'vadi, queen ofVideha, and mother of ewe of the ten princes,
Punyavar'man, a king with many virtuC5,I99
Pumabha'dra, a servlUll and friend of Kamapala, 1'17
Push'kariki, a maid of Queen Kalpa.sundari, 110
Pll5hpOd'bhava, one of the ten princes, 16
Rigaman'jari, a gay girl who mar· Nerbud'da, the modem form of the ries Apaharavarman, 87
princes, 10 Mitravar'man, half_brother of An_
antavarman, '115 Mu'rala, a vassal kingdom, '114
Nagapa'la,	lord of Sasikya, '114 Nalijan'gha, an aged retainer of
the queen of Vidarbha, '115 Nan'dini, the name of lndrasena
in another birth, 131 N araviihanadat'ta,	emperor of the
fairies, 64 N avama'liki, the bride of Pramati,
Sanskrit "Nat'marla," a river, Rijahan· ... a king and father of
"3	the hero, I Nidhipa'lita, a merchant in Cham- Rijava'hana, prince of Magadha,
pa,78	the hero of the book, 10 Nidhipatidac'ta, a business man in Ri'ma, a mythica.llting, 9
Vasundhan ']16 S.mhirnarman,	eldese brother 01
PraharavannlUl, 108 Sisi'kya, I vassal kingdom, U4 Satyavar'man.	lIOn01 Sitayarman,
3 Shaktikumi'ra, a man who 5C'Cb a
utisfactory wife, 168 Sh-:"un'tali a play by Kalidasa,
u
Shiim'ba, the name of Rajuahana In a previous incarnation, 49
Sham'bala, a flIIblc:ddemon, 107
Sltavat'man, a cou~1or of KtIljJ Rajahansa, 3
",
Shashinkue'ni, a maiden in the Bcnarcs,IJJ
Valabhi,175 Nim'bavllll, II wife who recoverl
her husband's affection, 166
Nitam'bavati, a woman won by lUI artful dodge, 166
Padmod'bhava,	a counselor of King Rajahansa, 3
Panehii'la, nilme of a country, 12'1
Rimatir'tha,	a sacred place ot pilgrimage, 14
RamaYlln'tiki, a rival of Queen Kalpllllundari, 114
Rime'shu, a Greek, captain of a sailing vessel, 164
Rangapati'ki,	the name of lndra- sena in another birth, 131
train ot Kanakslekha 196 Sha'taha.ll, a scbemlng' citilen 01
Videha, 1']3
Sh,aun'ah, the name 01 Klmapala In another birth, 131
Shi'bi. na.me of a country 169 Shl'~a! a great god, on~ 01 W
trinIty, I Shivani'ga, a c:ounaclor, IJ6
Shrivas'ti. mtrne 01 a city, 147
Shngi1iki. a nurse, 94
Shud'ralr.a, the nlUlle of Kama.pala In another birth, 131
Sulo'cha.ni, a lady at the court 01 Iknares,IJI
Sum:m'tra, aon of Dhannapala, J
Su'mati,8On 01 Siuvarman, J
Sumi'tra., alO of Oharmapala, ,1
SUTltjlmllll'jari, I nymrh.6J
Su'.hnltlt,	IOn 01 Padmodbhll'a,	J
Suvrit'ti, lhe wile of Ratnod bhava, 14
Titi'vali. a ,ady 01 the Y.kaha demigods, 16
1~uot'tami, a nymph, 74
Sanskrit "Pitalipu'ua,"	a city,
,,'
prince	ot
Prachandayar'man,	the	younger brother of Chllndavarman, ']17
Denarea, 133 Simh.agh6·ms (second), • priIoner
who becomes jailer, tOJ Slmhav.rman.	bog of the Anga
country, 62 Sindhuda~ta. the 'uher of Su-
Pun
ra, name ola country. 1'12
''
one 01 tM teO prioces
''
SOmsdu'ta.
"
'd
F
INDEX OF PROPER	AMES
I	youthtul SOmade'ri, a lad,. at the ClCIIU1 01
Denaro, I JI SOma.ra·shmj, father of Sura~
maniari,63 Sthii'nl, a couMdor. 1,]6 Suh'rna, name 01 a country, 108 Sulak'~h~ni. queen do'-&gIer 01
SOmadcvashar'man, hermit, I.
Trigar'ta. name 01. c:ounuy 166 Tungadhan'VaD, kina of tbt: Suh
ma countrY, 1$1
Ujjain,	the	modern	name	01 Ujjaylni, a capital city. 38
Up~itavat'man. one of the	ttl! ponces, 13
V'tathy., the elder brother of Brihaspui,74
U'tkala,	name	01 •	kingdom.	228
Vai.!lbra'vana, I merchant 01 PIt. nl,'u6
V.'1.blti, name of. city, 173 Vim.de'va, a hermit, 9 VimalO'thani bride 01 Scm...
datta, 29 Vin_vi'ai, a VUlIa! city, 213 Vasantabhi'nu, the lord of Ash-
maka, ~ Visavadat'ti, a heroine of r0-
manse, til Va',umlti, I queen and mother of
the hero, 2 Vasumi'uI,	father of Dh&namllra,
86 Vasun'dhllfi, queen o! Vldlrbha,
"S
Vasupi'lita, I man ."hoIe nidt- name is "Mister Ugly," 78
Vasutak',hita, • Itatesman "hOle eecelleae advice goet unheeded. ace
Varia, I f.iry, 6.t
Vatsani'bh.,	II deadly poUon, 217 Vl'dimati, the Dame of $om.de.,
in another	birth,	131 Vi'gnat, • fairy, 64 Vbhadi' .. , • niwlUN! of Koaha-
dua, IS. Vldu'bha, name oJ. countt}'. 199 VIde'ha, name of I kingdom, II Vidybh· ....rll. I ,cieo.tific conjurer
I. "
THE TEN PRI CES
55 Vthirabh,'dra,
•	ecrrcpecr	01
youth,101 Vik.t .... r'man, the usurping	mon--
arcll of Vickha. 101
Vamar'dUa,	a gambler,	81
Vma'y"'lti,	the name of 1Unci- mati	in ,nothe:r	birth,	131
Vm'dhya, a grOt forest, 9 V"1I"1Jr.C'lU, 'IUlu-m-la.	of Soma-
dina, 29 Vira.sC'na,	lord	of	Murall, V"lt1Uhl:'khara,	I rliry, 64 Vwhilull'rnan,	I prince: of Vide-
ba, 122 ~.t Viah'nu,	I	god,	OM of	the
trinllY. m Vllhnugup'ta,	an	luthoriq	on
political acicnc:e, '20'1 Vi'.brul"	one of the: ten prinCC31,0
y,j'nlvllti,	the: name of the belle of Avanri in I previous ;nClrnil-
lion,49 Yak'tha, I &tOUPof demigodJ, 16
21 4
s
I
L4.4.6Apr. '32-:;000
Dandin Ten nrinces.
M. I. T. LIBRARY 160363 This book is due on the last date
stamped below.
JUN l; 1932
JUL	~ 11932
IfEB 1 1 195
l
rorm
L53·11	M ...	·11·5000
•
MASSACHUSETIS INSTITUTE
OF TECHNOLOGY LIBRARY
I , 195( rU
LIBRARY STORAGE
ANNEX
rl L Ocr 15 IIlI"
MASSA
)NOLOGY _~ 3	90BO 02031	9662	~;.	1910.
te property of the Institute, shall be injured, as by any marks or writing e person to whom it stands charged
y a new copy, or by a new set if it l set.
....
11111111111111111111~lllIrnrlillllllllllll;111111111
SIGN THIS CARD AND LEAVE IT in the tray upon the desk.
NO BOOK may be taken from the room UNTIL it has been REGISTERED
in this manner.
RETURN	this book to the DESK
as soap as you have finished with it.
" • ~-'l I GIVE THE NEXT MAN A CHANCE.

;; LocalWords:  Rajavahana Rajavahana's Dandin Dandin's
