# My comments

This is a somewhat obscure translation of the Bhagavad Gita, done by
the prolific Sanskrit translator Arthur W. Ryder in 1929 (now public
domain: pre-1976, copyright never renewed). As far as I know, it is
the first and only complete translation into rhymed metrical English
verse. Such an attempt has its consequences.

By modern standards, this is not a good translation at all.

Translations are considered to lie between two ends:

- Translations (invariably in prose) that reproduce the meaning of the
  original verses to a great degree, and are thus considered to
  preserve the fidelity (called “literal” translations),

- Translations that

Inasmuch as these are the recognised extremes, this translation seems
neither literal nor literary. Or as Gerald James Larson talks of the
issue in _The song celestial: Two centuries of the Bhagavad Gita in
English_:

> The Stylistic Continuum
>
> It is a truism that every language is unique and that there are nuances and subtleties in one language that are simply untranslatable in another. Apart from this, however, every translator must address the issue of what might be called stylistic verisimilitude. Is the translation to reflect the phonology, morphology, and syntax of the first medium or is it to reflect only an appropriate style in the second medium? [...] Edgerton's precise translation of the Bhagavad Gita (1944) is a classic illustration of the first approach, and Edwin Arnold's The Song Celestial (1885) an illustration of the second. One might refer to this continuum as the “literal/literary continuum,” but much more is involved than that. Closer perhaps is an expression like “first-language/second-language continuum,” for it is quite possible to do a translation that is both literal and literary (for example, R. C. Zaehner's translation of the Gita, 1969) and one that is neither (for example, **Arthur Ryder's trivialization of both Sanskrit *and* English in his rendering of the Gita, 1929**). What is important for a translator is to choose a stylistic mode that is appropriate to one or both of the languages with which the translator is working, and then to use the mode consistently throughout the translation.

Well, yes. But as Ryder points out near the end of his introduction
below, if you regard the *form* of the poem as part of its content,
then something is lost in all other translations which is captured
here. Insofar as the form is part of the original, this is partly more
literal, and insofar as rhymed verse makes for good reading, this is
also more literary. But of course, this argument cannot be taken too
far or seriously, and you must judge for yourself.

The Gita is chanted, sung... it's the *gita*, after all.

The only equivalent in English is rhymed verse.

He even translates anushtup to 4-line verse, and the longer metre to
6-line verses!

It takes great motivation to read a prose translation, but a rhyming
translation can be read through (even if one tends to focus less on
meaning).

It does not seem very meaningful at places: “Goodness, passion and
darkness”?


# TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

                  I

    The world forever imitates
      The action of its best;
    Whatever law of life he sets,
      Is followed by the rest.  (iii. 21)

Among the many sacred books of India, the
Bhagavad-gita—the Song of the Blessèd One—is the
most influential, and probably the greatest. Among
that people whose long history shows it the most
deeply and the most creatively religious of peoples,
the Song has won preeminence as a sacred text.
Uncounted millions have drawn from it comfort and joy.
In it they have found an end to perplexity, a clear, if
difficult, road to salvation. Nor is it a mere document
of completed history; its influence does not wane.
Even in the West, in the face of prejudice and powerful
organization, the Song gains an increasing respect,
admiration, and devotion. It wins its way with no
violence, through sheer profundity and nobility.

Thus the Bhagavad-gita deserves attentive study:
first, as a scripture with a long history of power;
secondly, as a force that shapes today the life of a
great people; most of all, as a living light to all who,

                       from pride released,
     Contemning neither creed nor priest,

will receive illumination from its wisdom and beauty.

             II

    Although they kill me, Krishna, I
      Have no desire to slay;
    The earth would not reward me, nor
    The universe repay.            (i. 35)

The date and authorship of the Song cannot be
determined; it is probably two thousand years old,
or more. It comes to us as an episode in the sixth
book of the vast epic called the Maha-bharata; but
that great work is itself the growth of centuries,
and cannot be exactly dated in any part.

The great epic relates the events of a mighty struggle
between two families of princely cousins, reared
and educated together. In manhood they quarrel
over the royal inheritance, and their difference is
sternly solved by war. Both sides have an arguable
case, while heroism and honor are not lacking to
either.

At the opening of the sixth book, the two armies
are opposed on Kuru field. As the first missiles fly,
Prince Arjuna, gazing at the enemy line, perceives his
kinsmen and others to whom honor is due; sinks on his
chariot floor; and refuses to fight. His argument
against domestic strife is answered by Krishna, his
charioteer, who is gradually revealed as an incarnation
of Almighty God. The setting of the Song in the
great epic is most powerful; for if it can be shown why
a warrior must, on fit occasion, kill his own kinsmen,
all lesser and easier cases of duty are obviously
included.

Thus the Bhagavad-gita is, first and foremost, a
discussion of duty; not a mere eloquent exhortation
(such are common enough) but a true answer, satisfying
the reflective mind, to the insistent question _why_
formal duties must be performed, even when they
appear stupid or cruel.

This answer is given in the second canto. But
Prince Arjuna is not content. In meeting his natural
doubts, Krishna is led to discuss the nature of the
physical universe, and the relation of man's soul
thereto; so that what began as the consideration of
an ethical problem, becomes a complete scripture.

               III

    All duties that the dullards do
      In selfish, greedy mood,
    The wise should also do, detached,
      For universal good.               (iii. 25)

Krishna's secret is non-attachment, or disciplined
activity. The ascetic solution is no solution, for man
is driven to work, whether he will or no. If, however,
he permits himself to believe that his soul is
concerned with work, he becomes a materialist. Work
well done not only does not bring salvation, it has no
tendency to bring salvation; yet salvation is impossible
without it. Its value is great, but negative. It
is a condition necessary, but not sufficient. It is
important because it is unimportant. What wise man
permits the unimportant to block salvation?

In simple cases the truth of this doctrine is
obvious. Suppose I plan a long walk, and find a pebble
in my shoe. Its removal is a necessary condition of
success in my plan, yet of itself does not further that
plan; hinders it indeed, if I imagine this action to be
of itself meritorious, and become attached thereto.
The same reasoning applies to the acquisition of the
grammar of a language by one whose object is the
enjoyment of poetry written in that language.

This truth has a corollary. Work is well done only
by those who perceive its unimportance.

    The guided mind can leave behind
      On earth, both good and ill;
    So search out discipline, whereby
    Is added meaner skill.            (ii.50)

An apt illustration may be found in games of physical
skill, in which success begins at the point where strain
ceases.

The principle of non-attachment is extended by
Krishna to cover all labor. Here is the solution of the
often-fumbled problem of the relation between faith
and works. The more this principle is pondered, the
more fruitful it appears, the more true.

              IV

    He sees himself in every life,
      Sees every life that lives
    Within himself; and so to all
      A like emotion gives.        (vi. 29)

As Krishna's discourse develops, aiming to explain
the constitution of the physical universe and the
relation of man's soul thereto, it draws ideas from three
schools of thought, known in their codified form as the
Vedanta philosophy, the Sankhya, and the Yoga.

The Vedanta is monistic. It teaches that there is
but one reality, and this spiritual, the “self”;
consequently, that all material manifestations are illusory.
For the Hindus, early dissatisfied with their inherited
polytheism, discovered the Absolute. Then, since the
reality of the perceiving mind cannot be denied, there
is no escape from the conclusion that the self is the
Absolute. The three stages of thought may be labelled
with the tags “They are,” “It is,” “I am It.”
Such infinite expansion of the self until fear and desire
vanish, offers a vision of extraordinary emotional
power; it is what we should all believe if we could.
And even those not mystically gifted have occasional
glimpses, in aesthetic joy and other strong, pure
experiences, of what the levelling of all barriers might
mean.

The great achievement of the Vedanta is not
logical, but emotional: a vision of what salvation, if
attained, would be. The achievement is very great;
for it was necessary to reconcile security with activity,
and also the elevation of the plane of life with a
conceivable prolongation of the present life. The achievement
is best appreciated by considering how other religions
have evaded the question, or have boggled it.

            V

    Now goodness, passion, darkness roam
    As elements in matter's home;
    In bodies, hero, their control
    Forever fetters changeless soul.    (xiv. 5)

The Sankhya system is pluralistic. It postulates
the reality and conservation of matter; also, the
existence of an indefinite number of individual souls. Its
greatness is logical and scientific, not emotional. To
the splendid lift and sweep of the Vedanta, it opposes
“the still, small voice, whispering ‘bosh!’”

Matter consists of three elements, bearing the
names goodness, passion, and darkness. It is not here
necessary to enlarge upon these three elements, since
their nature and operation are clearly presented in
cantos fourteen, seventeen, and eighteen of the Song.

Matter is eternal and indestructible; but before
creation, the three elements are in equilibrium. A
disturbance of this equilibrium produces individuals, or
in common phrase, causes the creation of the world.
Each individual behaves in accordance with his physical
constitution, being good, passionate, or dark in
proportion to the mixture in him of the three
elements.

To man, the most important part of the physical
universe is his own inner organs. These are three: the
intellect, the I-maker, and the brain. The intellect is
the organ of determination; the I-maker is the organ
which introduces into matter the concepts “I,” “me,”
“mine”; the brain is the central office of the five
senses and the five functions. All thought, all psychic
affections take place in matter.

Yet the system is not materialistic; the operation of
the soul, though reduced to a single function, is
essential. The soul “illuminates” matter, brings it
into consciousness. All human pain results from the
soul's false identification of itself with what is in
truth material. Salvation is release from this false
identification; the soul then becomes like a light
illuminating nothing, a mirror reflecting nothing, a
clear crystal untinged by the red flower of passion.

It is not here possible to do justice to the wisdom
and penetration of the Sankhya system. To the present
writer it appears a nearer approximation to the
truth concerning the soul's relation to the physical
universe than does any Occidental philosophy.

              VI

    Who does my work with utter love,
      From all attachments free
    And free from hate of any life,
      Brave soldier, comes to Me.    (xi. 55)

The Yoga system has much in common with the
Sankhya. But it adds rules for spiritual self-discipline,
and it introduces a personal God. The latter feature
is, in strict logic, indefensible, since in such a system
neither the power nor the mercy of God has any
opportunity for action. The God of the Yoga is one
more concession to man's insistent craving to conceive
the superhuman in terms of personality.

From these three sources—the Vedanta, the
Sankhya, and the Yoga—the Song draws conceptions
monistic, pluralistic, and monotheistic. That such
conceptions cannot be perfectly fused, is, from
rationalism's standpoint, obvious; and the lack of
complete logical coherence is sometimes made a reproach
to the Bhagavad-gita. In a certain sense, the reproach
is not unjustified; yet here, too, a foolish consistency
would seem the hobgoblin of little minds, if the emotional
reconciliation is perfect.

VII

    Some find the self within the self
      Through self-communion still;
    A second group, through intellect;
      And others through the will;
    While some through discipline of works,
      The needful task fulfil.              (xiii. 24)

A most remarkable feature of the Song is its generosity,
its recognition of the irreducible diversity of
human nature. Other religions, zealous for a partial
truth, harshly excommunicate those incapable of
following a certain narrow path; their motto appears
to be: He that is not with me is against me; and he
that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad. And
when the cruelty of deep conviction is overcome, they
tend to a flabby broad-mindedness, effacing
distinctions between superior and lower, hard and easy,
right and wrong.

But the Song (most clearly in xii. 8-11) provides
various roads to salvation: the way of intuition, the
way of concentrated study, the way of disciplined
activity, the way of renunciation. All are hard, but
for each man one or another is possible, so that none
need despair. In its combination of sternness with
tolerance, the Song is unique. Strangely noble also
is its generous assurance that even a partial
acceptance of its doctrine has saving power.

    No effort so inspired is lost;
      No backward slip is here;
    The tiniest fragment of this law
      Redeems from monstrous fear.   (ii. 40)

Two difficulties in the doctrine present themselves
to Occidentals. The first concerns caste, which is
assumed without argument, so that a possible perplexity
concerning the content of duty never arises. This
difficulty is perhaps superficial, since all organized
society has caste, with regulations more or less flexible;
and it is probable that few men are seriously
bewildered as to what duty is. Without discussion of
the practical working of Indian caste, it may be
permitted here to praise the theoretic beauty of a rigid
caste-system, under which (since duty is prescribed
from birth) labor is seen to be of only negative
importance, and the soul is freed from the fetters of
work.

The second, and more profound, difficulty concerns
the belief in the transmigration of souls. It is
true that this doctrine satisfies the logical sense; it
alone introduces order and justice into the otherwise
inexplicable sadness of human fate; and there is a
little, a very little, objective evidence of its truth.
Yet it is hard to accept with a genuine faith.

               VIII

    From native nature every life
    Its special faith receives;
    For man is fashioned from his faith
    And is what he believes.             (xvii. 3)

The Bhagavad-gita makes its prime appeal to the
reflective mind, depressed and perplexed by the spectacle
of life. Such a mind, after bitter experience of
the meanness of power, the imperfections of institutions,
the sadness of knowledge, inevitably raises the
questions: Why do one's duty, in such a world as the
present? How is it possible, in such a world, to see
any profit or joy in duty done? Partial answers may
be found in Homer, Ecclesiastes, Lucretius, the New
Testament, and elsewhere; the full answer, satisfying
both intellect and spirit, is given in the Song of the
Blessèd One.

Though such a procedure is somewhat mechanical,
it may be well to enumerate certain fundamental
thoughts of the Song, foundation-stones upon which
is reared its structure of peace and joy:

 1\) The job of living must be accepted, with all its
 specific limitations, such as sex, race, and social
 status.

 2\) The job must be done without attachment or
 desire of reward (as in Jesus' beautiful parable of the
 sower).

 3\) Salvation is difficult, but open to all. Since
 there are paths adapted to diverse capacities, none
 need despair.

 4\) Intelligent thought is necessary, not shuffling
 of responsibility upon any other, whether man or
 god. And beyond intelligent thought, there is need
 of faith,

    For man is fashioned from his faith,
      And is what he believes.


             IX

    This virtuous dialogue of ours
    If any study, he
    Has brought me wisdom's sacrifice:
    I speak with certainty.            (xviii. 70)

An extensive literature of comment, in the languages
of India and of Europe, concerns itself with
the Bhagavad-gita. There are also numerous translations
into modern languages.

Several of the prose translations into English have
real excellence; they reproduce the substance of the
text, insofar as substance can be divorced from form.
One verse translation—_The Song Celestial_ of Sir
Edwin Arnold—has, and deserves, a high reputation;
yet it diverges rather widely from the original, as
regards both metrical form and the detail of
interpretation.

The present version aims, so far as is possible, at
the exactness of the better prose translations, while
holding as much of the original's poetic grace and
power as could be captured.

                                Arthur W. Ryder

Berkeley, California
June, 1929


# Canto I

## Narrative introduction: Arjuna hesitates to kill his kinsmen in battle

< Dhritarashtra said,

    My men and Pandu's hostile host
      Who met on Kuru plain—
    Their manhood's field—were keen for fight:
    But what did each attain?

< Sanjaya said,

    Your kingly son—when he beheld
    The hostile army, led
    By Pandu foemen—drawing near
    His aged teacher, said:

    My teacher, see! Before us stands
      A mighty, marshalled throng;
    A subtle pupil of your own
      Deploys that army strong:

    Heroic archers, fierce in fight
      As Pandu's offspring are;
    A king I see, a second king,
      A third with lordly car;

    A fourth, a fifth; the manly lord
      Of Kashi's realm; and then
    Comes Kunti's king; his brother; and
      Bold Shaivya, bull of men;                                      (5)
    There stands another pair of kings
      Whose valor reaches far;
    And sons of two most lovely queens—
      Each with his lordly car.

    But now, O best of Brahman men,
      Pay heed while I proclaim
    My army's stoutest captains whom
      I mention, name by name:

    Yourself; and Bhishma; Kripa next
      By whom great fights were won;
    Your child; Vikarna; Karna, too;
      And Somadatta's son;

    And many other heroes who
      Have staked their lives for me
    With varied arms to cut and thrust,
      All skilled in strategy.

    Our army, led by Bhishma, seems
      Unequal to its task;
    The marshalled foemen have the strength
      That circumstances ask.                                         (10)
    But close your ranks, brave gentlemen!
      Whatever fate befall,
    To battle's end our chief defend:
      Guard Bhishma, one and all!

    And valiant Bhishma, grandsire of
      The noble Kuru clan,
    Bred joyous lust of battle in
      His king. The grand old man
    Sounded his conch-shell. Round the ranks
      His lion war-cry ran.

    Then drums that boomed or shrilled or squeaked
      Were beaten. Trumpets blew
    And conch-shells. In one moment raised,
      The screaming fury flew.

    White horses drew a splendid car,
      And in it Krishna stood
    With Arjuna. They blew their shells
      Divine in fighting mood.

    For Krishna blew his Demon-spoil;
      Arjun, his Heaven-sent;
    While fierce wolf-bellied Bhima's breath
      To his great conch was lent;                                    (15)
    The Pandus' royal leader drew
      From Conquest notes of power;
    The princely twins, his brothers, blew
      On Sweet and Jewel-flower.

    The mighty archer of Kashi;
      He of the stately car;
    Three other kings of lofty name,
      Invincible in war;

    King Drupad, and his daughter's sons
      Blew each his several shell;
    The stout-armed child of Arjuna
      Blew valiantly, as well.

    A din arose, the hearts of foes
      To pierce and terrify;
    Arose a din, to echo in
      The earth and in the sky.

    Then monkey-bannered Arjuna
      Beheld the ordered foe;
    Though missiles had begun to fly,
      He lifted up his bow                                            (20)
    And spoke to Krishna, having need
      His purpose to explain.

< Arjuna said:

    Unshaken warrior, halt the car
      Between the armies twain

    While I inspect the men who stand
      Against us, battle-keen.
    Who are to fight with me, before
      The struggle's end is seen?

    I would regard the soldiers who
      Make up that hostile line.
    Who fight to win a triumph in
      Their leader's dark design.

< Sanjaya said:

    So Krishna halted once again
    The car between the armies twain.

    In face of Bhishma, Drona, and
      Of many a mighty king
    “Behold, brave Arjuna,” he said,
      “The Kurus' gathering.”                                         (25)
    And Arjuna saw standing there
      The kin of many mothers,
    Saw teachers, grandsons, grandsires, sires,
      Children, companions, brothers,

    Fathers of wives, and comrades dear
      Within the armies twain.
    When he beheld so many kin
      Upon the battle-plain,

    Profoundest pity entered him;
      His spirit sank; he said.

< ARJUNA SAID,

    When, Krishna, I behold my kin
      To battle's fury led,

    I feel my mouth go dry; I feel
      My fainting members fail;
    My hair stand up in horror; and
      My trembling body quail.

    The bow Gandiva drops from out
      My hand; my skin is burning;
    I can no longer keep my feet;
      My maddened brain is turning;                                   (30)
    And evil omens threaten me;
      Krishna, it is not right
    To look for any blessing, if
      I kill my kin in fight.

    I do not wish for victory,
      A kingdom, or its joys:
    The kingdom, its delights, and life
      Would then be foolish toys.

    A kingdom, its delights, its joys
      I only need for those
    Who, venturing their lives and wealth,
      Stand yonder as our foes:

    Our teachers, grandsires, sires, the sires
      And brothers of our wives,
    Our uncles, grandsons, sons, the kin
      Dear as our very lives.

    Although they kill me, Krishna, I
      Have no desire to slay;
    The earth would not reward me, nor
      The universe repay.                                             (35)
    When Dhritarashtra's sons are slain
      Where is our pleasure then?
    Mere sin would fasten on us, if
      We killed these desperate men.

    Ah, no! It is not right
      To kill our kin in fight.
    Where, having killed our kin,
      Would happiness begin?

    For though they bear a mind
    That greed has stricken blind,
      So do not see
    Betrayal as a sin,
    Nor ruin struggling in
      One family,

    Shall we not find a mind
    To leave such wrong behind
      Because we see,
    Bold soldier, what a sin
    Is ruin struggling in
      One family?

    Soon family observances
      Would lose all power to bless;
    The family entire is then
      Assailed by lawlessness.                                        (40)
    Through such assault of lawlessness
      The women grow impure;
    When women falter, mingling of
      An alien blood is sure;

    And this means hell, not only for
      The sinners, but for all;
    No longer honored fathers from
      Their seats in heaven fall.

    Such fatal peccancies, whereby
      Pure blood and custom flee,
    Subvert the immemorial laws
      Of caste and family.

    And men subverting family law
      (Our old traditions tell)
    Will find a certain dwelling-place
      Appointed them in hell.

    A curse upon such awful deeds!
      We planned a monstrous sin
    When, greedy for a kingdom's joys,
      We thought to kill our kin.                                     (45)
    If I oppose no weapon to
      Their weapons, if they slay
    My unresisting body, I
      Have found the better way.

< SANJAYA SAID:

    So Arjun in the battle spoke,
      Sank on his chariot's floor,
    Let fall his arrows and his bow,
      With sorrow smitten sore.

# Canto II

## Krishna's reply: Be brave (no reasons given)

< SANJAYA SAID:

    To him, desponding thus, his heart
      With inner pity stirred,
    His tear-filled eyes bewildered, then
      Krishna pronounced this word.

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    Whence, Arjun, in your hour of trial
      Comes this ignoble shame,
    Unfit for heaven, repugnant to
      An honorable name?

    Yield not to impotence, for you
      An unbefitting pose!
    Shun paltry feeble-heartedness!
      Arise! Distress your foes!

## Arjuna's doubts are not resolved

< ARJUNA SAID,

    _Your_ foes are devils. How shall I
      With arrows struggle to
    Fight Bhishma down, and Drona? For
      Great honor is their due.

    Far better eat a beggar's bread
      On earth, not having slain
    These honored ones, than strike them down
      (Although they lust for gain)
    And taste earth's richest banquets, all
      Smeared with a bloody stain.                                    (5)
    Defeat or conquest? Which would seem
      More grievous, is unclear;
    For Dhritarashtra's warlike sons,
      Before us marshalled here,
    Stand forth our kinsmen; slaying whom,
      Not even life were dear.

    A sinful pity clouds my soul;
      I know not wrong nor right:
    Reveal my duty certainly
      Unto my clearer sight;
    Give sure instruction: for I come
      A pupil, seeking light.

    For I perceive no instrument
      To mitigate the woe
    That then would desiccate my powers,
      Though rivals failed, and though
    I were the king of gods above
      And this rich earth below.

< SANJAYA SAID,

    So spoke heroic Arjuna
      To Krishna, then released
    His final purpose in the word
      “I will not fight,” and ceased.

## Krishna continues: Do not grieve over what is imperishable

    With gentle smiles, between the hosts
      Of foeman and ally,
    Unto despondent Arjuna
      Thus Krishna made reply.                                        (10)
< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    You a philosopher! On them
      Who need it not, you shed
    Your pity. Wise men pity not
      The living or the dead.

    There is no past when I was not,
      Nor you, nor these; and we
    Shall—none and never—cease to live
      Throughout the long to-be.

    As this embodied soul endures
      His childhood, youth, and age,
    So surely waits a future form—
      No doubts perplex the sage.

    But matter's impacts—cold and heat,
      Pleasure and pain—are sure
    To shock and pass, impermanent;
      Endure, brave prince, endure.

    For any man, O bull of men,
      Unvexed thereby, firm, free
    From pain and pleasure, fits himself
      For immortality.                                                (15)
    Since naught unreal can come to birth,
      No real thing cease to be,
    The limits of the twain are plain
      To them who truly see.

    Eternal, then, is that by which
      Creation's web was spun;
    Destruction of eternal life
      Is possible to none.

    These bodies pass; but he within,
      With life immortal dight,
    Is neither limited nor lost:
      Therefore, brave hero, fight!

    If the red slayer think he slays,
      The slain think he be slain,
    They err: the slayer vainly kills;
      The victim dies in vain.

    He is not born, he does not die
      Forever and forever;
    The body may be slain, but he
      Can pass and perish never,
    Unborn, inveterate, antique
      In ceaseless new endeavor.                                      (20)

    How then, or whom, can he who knows
      What passes not away,
    Eternal. changeless, uncreate,
      Slay that, or cause to slay?

    Even as a man will cast aside
      His tattered garments, taking
    New vesture, so the body's lord,
      Old, tattered forms forsaking,
    Endues himself with fresh attire
      In forms of newer making.

    No weapon's edge can cut him; nor
      Can water saturate;
    No fire can burn him; him no wind
      That blows, can desiccate.

    Immune to cutting and to fire,
      To dry and wet, is he;
    Undying, boundless, mountain-firm
      Throughout eternity;

    Beyond the range of form or thought
      Or variation's whim:
    Therefore (this nature recognized)
      How can you pity him?                                           (25)
## Nor over what is perishable

    Or if you think him subject to
      Each oft-recurrent whim
    Of birth and death—still, mighty lord,
      How can you _pity_ him?

    For all, once born, will surely die;
      What dies, will come to birth;
    In matters ineluctable
      What is your pity worth?

    All life's beginnings are obscure,
      But clear the middle plan;
    Obscure again the latter end—
      Why should it grieve a man?

    One sees the soul as wonder,
      A something unexplained;
    One speaks of him, one hears him
      While wonder still remained:
    For even through hearing is no
      Full understanding gained.

    The body's lord who dwells within
      Each form, is never slain:
    That pity, therefore, is misplaced
      Toward any life, is plain.                                      (30)
## Appeal to duty as discerned by instinct and training

    Besides, to tremble at the view
      Of duty, is not right,
    Since warriors have no duty more
      Ennobling than fair fight,

    Which freely offers open gates,
      O prince, to heaven's bliss;
    And happy warriors run with joy
      To meet a fight like this.

    With shirking of this righteous fight
      Your infamies begin:
    Your virtue and your name are lost,
      And you are sunk in sin.

    All living things will gossip of
      Your everlasting shame;
    And to a man once honored, death
      Is less than evil fame.

    To simple soldiers such a flight
      Must craven shirking seem,
    While you exchange their reverence
      For sudden disesteem.                                           (35)
    And many insults will be spread
      By them who cherish hate,
    Naming you something less than man:
      Is there a sadder fate?

    Be slain and thus attain
      The sky most high;
    Or win, and revel in
      Earth's show below—
    Rise! Find a ready mind
      For rightful fight.

    Make level conquest and defeat;
      Pain, pleasure; loss and gain:
    Then gird yourself to fight; for thus
      No tainting sins remain.

## Thus far goes Sankhya rationalism; but Yoga intuition has more to say

    Now add the wisdom of the will
      To wisdom of the mind;
    For thus, O prince, the broken bond
      Of works is left behind.

    No effort so inspired is lost;
      No backward slip is here:
    The tiniest fragment of this law
      Redeems from monstrous fear.                                    (40)
    True thought is simple, and its heart
      Is resolute, unbending;
    Irresolution ramifies
      In whims without an ending.

## Screed against scholars

    But undiscerning men who deck
      Their speech with verbal flowers,
    With scripture phrases, who proclaim:
      “The total truth is ours!”

    Who hug desires, who aim at heaven,
      New births, rewards, the swarm
    Of lordly luxuries that flow
      From duties multiform,

    Who love their lordly luxuries
      With passion overwrought—
    These have no wisdom resolute;
      They know no centred thought.

    For scripture deals with objects. Be
      Superior to this!
    Pure goodness be, not glad nor grieved,
      Calm, free from avarice!                                        (45)
    For scripture, to the Brahman who
      Discerns and understands,
    Has just such value as a well
      In overflooded lands.

## Labor, but care nothing for the fruits of labor

    With labor let your business be,
      Not with rewards of work;
    Be not impelled by work's rewards,
      Yet do not think to shirk.

    Labor without attachment, firm
      In discipline of will:
    Make level gain and failure; thus
      True discipline fulfil.

    For worth of works lies far beneath
      True discipline of mind;
    Seek refuge there, and leave rewards
      Unto the sordid kind.

    The guided mind can leave behind
      On earth, both good and ill;
    So search out discipline, whereby
      Is added meaner skill.                                          (50)
    For sages of the guided mind
      Abandon labor's gain;
    So freed from bonds of birth, they find
      A place that knows no pain.

    And when your mind shall leave behind
      Confused delusions vain,
    Then scriptures—present and to-be—
      Will fill you with disdain.

    When once your mind, to scriptures blind,
      Stands firm and fixed within
    Pure concentration, you attain
      The perfect discipline.

## Indifference is peace

< ARJUNA SAID,

    But, Krishna, how describe the man
      Concentred, firm of wit?
    How would one fixed of mind proceed
      To speak? or walk? or sit?

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    When all desires are spurned, that mean
      The brain's bewilderment,
    Then, Arjun, is he firm of wit
      With self, in self, content.                                    (55)
    By pain untroubled, unallured
      By pleasure, is the sage
    Whose concentration puts to flight
      All passion, fear, and rage.

    Whoever scorns self-interest,
      To gloom and glory blind,
    Without desire or loathing, he
      Has an established mind.

    He, when he draws his senses from
      All objects of their kind,
    As a turtle draws within his shell,
      Has an established mind.

    To them who fast, the objects fade
      While still the hunger stays:
    Even hunger vanishes for them
      Who on the highest gaze.

    For, Arjun, though a man may strive
      With more than common sense,
    His churning instincts drag astray
      The mind with violence.

    Subdue them all; be disciplined;
      Leave all but Me behind:
    Since he who masters every sense,
      Has an established mind.

    When man reflects on things of sense,
      Attachments to them move
    His spirit; love thus comes to birth;
      And wrath is born of love;

    Of wrath, delusion; and thereof
      A roving memory tossed;
    With memory fails intelligence;
      And so the man is lost.

    But, meeting things with senses from
      Desire and hatred free.
    Subdued to his self-mastered soul,
      He wins serenity.

    And when serenity is won,
      All griefs are overpast;
    Since straightway in the mind serene
      Intelligence stands fast.                                       (65)
    The unsteadied lack intelligence,
      Lack thought of things divine;
    The unthinking lack perfected peace,
      So in discomfort pine.

    For when the mind of man becomes
      His gadding senses' slave,
    It buffets wisdom, as the wind
      A ship upon the wave.

    He then whose senses are no more
      With things of sense entwined,
    But wholly free, brave hero, he
      Has an established mind.

    When other creatures sink in night,
      The seer, self-mastered, wakes;
    ’Tis night to him, when on the world
      Its hour of dawning breaks.

    As entering rivers seek to fill
      But do not fill the sea,
    So all desires may enter him,
      Yet perfect peace shall he
    Hold safe. To him who seeks desires,
      Such peace shall never be.                                      (70)
    So, dropping all desires, the man
      Who walks in full release
    From every lust of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’
      Attains his perfect peace.

    This, hero, is a resting-place
      Of Brahma's high design;
    Perplexities are banished hence;
      And man, within this shrine
    Abiding at his final hour,
      Attains to peace divine.

# Canto III

## Why then work at all?

< ARJUNA SAID,

    If wisdom seem the greater thing
      To you, and work the less,
    Why, O my master, drive me to
      This work of frightfulness?

    With seeming ambiguities
      You rob my mind of rest:
    Determine one clear course for me
      That I may seek the best.

## Because life is work; but indifference to results is needful

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    Still, blameless hero, as of old
      My twofold prescript lives:
    The discipline of intellect;
      And that which action gives.

    Inert refusal cannot save
      From work, by mere negation;
    Nor can perfection be attained
      By bald renunciation.

    None for a single moment can
      Abide work-free and still;
    Since driven by matter's elements,
      Man works despite his will.                                     (5)
    The self-deceiver who would curb
      His active powers, to sit
    Reflecting on the things of sense,
      Is dubbed a hypocrite.

    While he who can—his senses curbed—
      With active powers proceed
    To work without attachment. may
      Be termed a man indeed.

## Necessity of sacrifice

    Perform the task appointed you;
      Far better work than shirking:
    For even your body's life could not
      Continue but for working.

    Save for the works of sacrifice,
      All labors cling and bind;
    With sacrificial purpose work,
      Attachment left behind.

    The Lord, creating sacrifice
      With man, proclaimed of old:
    Through this be multiplied; may this
      Yield wishes manifold.                                          (10)
    Through this pay honor to the gods;
      And may they honor you:
    High bliss shall be attained through gifts
      Of mutual honor due.

    Gods, paid by sacrifice, will grant
      The banquets that you crave;
    Who eats their gifts without return,
      Is but a thievish knave.

    The good who pay the gods, then eat,
      Are freed from guilt within,
    While rogues who cook for selfish ends,
      Are truly eating sin.

    All living things proceed from food;
      And food is born of rain;
    Rain follows on the sacrifice;
      Whose Source is work again;

    Work springs from spirit; this from the
      Imperishable springs:
    Thus sacrifice the spirit holds
      Of all eternal things.                                          (15)
    So rolls the wheel; and he on earth
      Who does not help it roll,
    Lives an unserviceable life,
      A sensual, sinful soul;

## But be satisfied with the self

    While he who finds within the self
      An all-sufficient beauty,
    Pure joy, contentment absolute,
      Is freed from sense of duty.

    To him no action done, nor left
      Undone, has any worth;
    He craves no necessary boon
      From anyone on earth.

    Without attachment, therefore, pay
      Each day's appointed toll;
    Since only he who works detached,
      May win the highest goal.

## Set an example to weaker brethren

    Through labor was perfection won
      By Janak and his brood
    Of heroes. You should labor thus
      For universal good.                                             (20)
    The world forever imitates
      The action of its best;
    Whatever law of life he sets,
      Is followed by the rest.

    The triple world contains no task
      Demanding _my_ endeavor,
    Naught unattained to be attained;
      Yet I work on forever.

    If I should slacken for a time
      In my unwearied work,
    All men, brave Arjun, everywhere
      Would imitate, and shirk.

    If I should cease to labor, then
      These worlds would sink away;
    I should confound all ordered life,
      And these my children slay.

    All duties that the dullards do
      In selfish, greedy mood
    The wise should also do, detached,
      For universal good.                                             (25)
    Be wise; confuse no cherished faith
      Dull, selfish brains within;
    Approve all works. But work yourself
      With stern self-discipline.

    From matter's mechanism all
      Earth's restless works proceed,
    While some deluded egoist
      Assumes: “I did the deed.”

    But he who knows as strange to him
      Work's mechanistic goal,
    Sees matter act in matter, and
      Dissociates his soul.

    When matter's action stirs the greed
      Of sad materialists,
    The enlightened should not jar these dull,
      Imperfect scientists.

## Work at your own task; constrain not nature

    Pledge all your works to Me. Seek in
      The Oversoul for light;
    So, free from selfishness, and hope
      And fevered anguish, fight!                                     (30)
    The man of faith, from malice free,
      Who this my doctrine heeds
    And ever practices, may win
      Salvation even by deeds.

    While he whom malice leads to scorn
      This doctrine's high command,
    Is quite deluded, and is lost:
      He does not understand.

    The wise man also must obey
      His nature without fail.
    Life ever follows nature. What
      Will violence avail?

    The objects of each several sense
      Are bait about the den
    Of Passion and of Hatred. Shun
      These ambushed highwaymen!

    Far better botch your job than gain
      Perfection in your neighbor's:
    Die if you must, but do not run
      The risk of alien labors.                                       (35)
## The enemy is Desire and Wrath

< ARJUNA SAID,

    But, Krishna, who or what compels
      A man to practice sin
    Against his will, as though some force
      Pulled him and pushed him in?

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    Desire and wrath! Desire and wrath!
      The gluttonous monster! He
    That springs from man's self-interest!
      Behold the enemy!

    Like smoke engulfing parent fire,
      Or rust the mirror's face
    Or womb the unborn child, he hugs
      The world in his embrace.

    The wise man's wisdom, Arjun, is
      Engulfed by draped Desire,
    The eternal enemy, the hard
      To be extinguished fire.

    In senses, brain, and intellect
      He dwells; confounds the whole
    Of human wisdom by their means;
      And thus deludes the soul.                                      (40)
    Therefore constrain your senses first,
      Brave soldier, and destroy
    This monstrous foe of conscious truth
      And wisdom's inner joy.

    High are the senses; higher yet
      The brain in nature's plan;
    Yet higher is the intellect;
      Highest of all is Man.

    Oh, let the self find strength within
      The self. Gaze ever higher
    To what beyond the intellect
      Is given to admire.
    So, sturdy warrior, smite the foe,
      The bitter foe, Desire.



# Canto IV

## Even Krishna must do works, but he seeks no reward

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    I to Vivasvat once proclaimed
      This law that never dies;
    And he to Manu, who therewith
      Rendered Ikshvaku wise.

    By this succession it was known
      To many royal sages;
    But, hero, it was lost on earth
      As ages followed ages.

    This ancient mystery supreme,
      This doctrine true for aye,
    To you, my devotee and friend,
      I re-proclaim today.

< ARJUNA SAID,

    Vivasvat's birth was earlier far
      Than yours. Since this is so,
    How am I to interpret your
      Proclaiming long ago?

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    My former lives are many, as
      Are yours. And I recall
    These lives, heroic Arjuna,
      While you forget them all.                                      (5)
    For I, undying, uncreate,
      Lord of all life on earth,
    In mystic manner (following
      My nature) come to birth.

    Whenever vice grows prosperous
      And virtue fades in pain,
    O prince of Bharat's breeding,
      I Create myself again.

    To save the saintly, and to curb
      The evil-doers' rage,
    To establish virtue, I am born
      In each succeeding age.

    If any truly knows my birth
      And work celestial, he
    Escapes rebirth when life is done:
      He, Arjun, comes to Me.

    Yes, many, filled with utter trust,
      From fear, wrath, passion free,
    By bleak self-knowledge purified,
      Have entered into Me.                                           (10)
    In ways diverse do they approach,
      And diverse welcome win;
    For all men, Arjun, everywhere
      Must tread my path within.

    Some sacrifice to earthy gods
      That works' rewards be gained;
    For in the human world, success
      In works is soon attained.

    Four castes I made for tasks diverse
      And matter's varied range;
    I made them, yet myself remain
      Beyond all tasks, all change.

    My works contaminate me not,
      I yearn for no reward;
    Nor is he bound by works, who thus
      Beholds in me his Lord.

    So minded, worked the men of old
      Who hungered for salvation;
    Let ancient work of ancient men
      In you meet no frustration.                                     (15)
## Working is not work; not-working is work

    To work? or not to work? Such are
      The questions that perplex
    Even the poets. Therefore I
      Will solve the doubts that vex,
    Imparting knowledge apt to save
      Your soul from sinful flecks.

    True work, perverted work, non-work
      Must all be understood:
    For this mysterious path of work
      Winds through a tangled wood.

    Who sees non-working lurk in work,
      Working in non-work lurk,
    Is wise, is disciplined, a man
      Successful in all work.

    When all initiatives are
      Desire- and fancy-free,
    When work is burned in wisdom's fire,
      Wise men a wise man see.

    Detached from fruits of labor in
      Contented self-reliance,
    A man may plunge in works, and yet
      Bid work a calm defiance.                                       (20)
    At nothing grasping, hoping naught,
      Mind, soul in strict restraint,
    Doing his body's work alone,
      He shuns all sinful taint.

    Past opposites, from envy free,
      Content with what is found,
    Unmoved in failure and success,
      He works, yet is not bound.

## The work of sacrifice is needful, but may be made mystical and symbolic

    Set free, his thoughts in wisdom based,
      Scorning attachment's price,
    He sees all labor melt and pass,
      His work a sacrifice.

    His gift is Spirit. Spirit is
      Actor, and act, and flame.
    His goal is Spirit. For he works
      Rapt, in the Spirit's name.

    Some ministrants make sacrifice
      To mere gods. Some progress
    To sacrifice self-sacrifice
      In flames of holiness.

    Some burn in fires of self-control
      Their organs of desire,
    While some consume the objects in
      Those selfsame organs' fire.

    All acts that in the senses root,
      All those that breath begins,
    Some burn in wisdom-kindled flames
      Of stern self-disciplines.

    Some saints severe make sacrifice
      Of wealth, or bleak denial,
    Of learning, or of wisdom, or
      Deep contemplation's trial.

    One sacrifices outward breath,
      And inward breath, another;
    Thus checking each by each, they strive
      Excessive breath to smother.

    Yet others, fasting, offer up
      Their life in living breath.
    All these are deft. Through sacrifice
      They do their sins to death.                                    (30)
    The nectar-food of sacrifice
      Leads to eternal bliss:
    Could any other world be won
      By means that forfeit this?

    So diverse sacrifices, spread
      Before the Spirit's face,
    Spring all from work. This knowing, you
      Shall win salvation's grace.

## For work is made perfect in wisdom

    Rather to wisdom's sacrifice
      Than money's, be directed:
    All work whatever, valiant knight,
      In wisdom is perfected.

## Wisdom burns the after-effects of work

    This wisdom, then, with modesty,
      Zeal, deference, beseech;
    For wise men who discern the truth,
      Their truth will gladly teach.

    So never shall you come again
      Vainly perplexed to be,
    Because you will behold all life
      First in yourself, then Me.                                     (35)
    Yes, even although you be the chief
      Of sinners, none the less
    Shall wisdom's raft convey you safe
      Through seas of wickedness.

    As fuel upon the kindled fire
      To ashes straightway turns,
    Just so, brave Arjun, wisdom's flame
      All work to ashes burns.

    For naught on earth can purify
      Like wisdom. Self-control
    Discovers it to man at last
      Native, within his soul.

## For wisdom faith is necessary

    Through faith alone is wisdom won
      By one intent, restrained;
    But soon, on winning wisdom, is
      His perfect peace attained.

    The doubter, lacking faith, is lost;
      His folly has no measure.
    He loses earth, he loses heaven,
      He loses simple pleasure.                                       (40)
    When wisdom severs doubt, when works
      Are discipline alone,
    Man's works no longer fetter him:
      He calls his soul his own.

    Unwisdom is the source of doubt
      That in your bosom lies.
    A sword of wisdom you must now,
      To sever it, devise
    By trust in labor's discipline.
      Arise, brave prince! Arise!



# Canto IV

## The Sankhya way and the Yoga way are at bottom the same; but the Yoga way is the more natural to follow

< ARJUNA SAID:

    Renouncing works, performing works
      In turn you seem to praise.
    Oh, tell me, Krishna, certainly
      The better of these ways.

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    Renouncing and performing works
      Both lead to sure salvation.
    Yet of the two, performance still
      Excels renunciation.

    Man perfectly renounces, when
      Desire and hate have died.
    When opposites are overcome,
      His fetters fall aside.

    The wise man knows. But children may
      Proclaim as diverse still
    The self-denying disciplines
      Of intellect or will.
    The fruit of both is given him
      Who either can fulfil.

    Those trained in intellect or will
      To one abode proceed:
    Whoever sees the double road
      As single, sees indeed.                                         (5)
    Yet is renunciation hard
      With untrained will to gain;
    The will-trained sage in briefer time
      The Spirit may attain.

## Activity is present only in matter

    So disciplined, so self-subdued,
      So able to restrain
    Sense-powers, so purified, his soul
      Expanding to contain
    All souls that live, he labors yet
      Escapes from labor's stain.

    “Nothing is done by me,” he thinks
      (And simple truth he keeps)
    While touching, while he sees, or hears,
      Smells, eats, walks, breathes, or sleeps,

    Discourses, opens, shuts his eyes,
      Appropriates, resigns.
    “It is but senses acting on
      Sense-objects,” he opines.

    When he, detached, lays all his works
      Before his Spirit chief,
    Sin stains him not, as water-drops
      Stain not the lotus-leaf.                                       (10)
    If body, brain, and intellect,
      And sensive powers are free,
    He works detached, and for his soul
      Finds perfect purity.

    When fruits of work are firmly scorned,
      Essential peace is found;
    While wantons, grasping labor's fruit,
      Are by that effort bound.

    In thought rejecting every work,
      The lordly soul may dwell
    At ease within the body (that
      Nine-gated citadel)
    All need of work or causing work
      Ingenious to expel.

    This lord creates no agency,
      No worldly work's display,
    Nor fits the work to apt reward;
      But nature goes its way.

    This master takes upon himself
      No guilt nor good from any:
    Unwisdom, clouding wisdom here,
      Bewilders very many.                                            (15)
## Hence one should be indifferent to outer objects

    But when, by knowledge of the self,
      Unwisdom is undone,
    The goal supreme most clear will seem
      Through wisdom's heavenly sun.

    With That in purpose, mind, and soul,
      With thoughts thereto that soar,
    Those saved by wisdom from their sins,
      Departing, come no more.

    They look alike on some good priest
      Matured in learning's vow,
    An eater of dogs' flesh, a dog,
      An elephant, a cow.

    They conquer nature here on earth
      When differences cease.
    They rest at peace in Spirit, which
      Is flawless and at peace.

    The Spirit-conscious, firm of mind,
      Find nothing to perplex
    Their peace, when pleasures cease to please,
      Vexations cease to vex.                                         (20)
    When life to Spirit is attuned,
      Man finds within his soul
    The joyfulness that never comes
      While senses claim their toll.
    So disciplined, he finds the joys
      That ever new unroll.

    But all delights of contact, which
      Begin and have an end,
    Are truly wombs of pain. To such
      The wise will not attend.

    He who can conquer here on earth
      (Before his body's rest)
    The rush of anger and desire,
      Is disciplined, is blest.

## For peace is from within

    With inner comfort, inner light,
      And inner rapture blest,
    He turns pure Spirit, penetrates
      The Spirit's final rest.

    That final rest the sages win
      Who cut the knot of strife
    Controlled and stainless, taking joy
      In every happy life.

    That final rest enfolds the seer
      Whose thoughts are in control,
    Who leaves desire and wrath behind,
      Who understands his soul.

    He holds the outer world at bay;
      His glances never rove;
    His outward breath and inward breath
      In even measure move;

    Salvation is his only aim;
      Desire, fear, anger flee;
    His senses, brain, and intellect
      Are curbed. The saint is free.

    If he but knows that it is I
      Who finally must test
    Each sacrifice, each bleak denial,
      The world's high lord and best,
    The friend of every life that lives,
      He reaches final rest.


# Canto VI

## Peace is a reward rather than an instrument

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    That man renounces _and_ performs
      Who scorns his labor's price
    Yet does his work, not he who shuns
      Fit work and sacrifice.

    Renunciation. discipline
      As one we must admire:
    No man is disciplined without
      Renouncing heart's desire.

    The sage who strains for discipline,
      Finds work his instrument;
    When discipline is conquered, then
      A new tool—peace—is sent.

    And discipline is conquered when
      His thought from work retires,
    From works and things of sense, and flings
      Away all heart's desires.

    Oh, let the self exalt itself,
      Not sink itself below:
    Self is the only friend of self,
      And self self's only foe.                                       (5)
    For self, when it subdues itself,
      Befriends itself. And so
    When it eludes self-conquest, is
      Its own and only foe.

    So calm, so self-subdued, the self
      Has an unshaken base
    Through pain and pleasure, cold and heat,
      Through honor and disgrace.

    In truth and sapience sedate,
      Joy's peak a man may hold
    With senses disciplined, and rate
      Alike clod, stone, and gold.

    Who rates alike friend, lover, foe,
      Neutral, indifferent,
    Kinsman, the hateful, sinner, saint,
      Is deemed preeminent.

## Eternal vigilance over body and mind is necessary, but the reward is infinite

    Alone, withdrawn, and vigilant,
      He must forever cope
    With thought and self, and must renounce
      All heritage and hope.                                          (10)
    A settled seat he must erect
      Some holy spot within,
    Neither too high nor low, and spread
      With cloth, or grass, or skin.

    There sitting, let him concentrate
      His focussed thought, constrain
    His senses' action and his mind's,
      Soul-purity to gain.

    His body, head, and neck held firm
      And quiet, let his keen
    Glance center on his nose-tip, not
      Survey the distant scene.

    There let him vigilantly sit,
      Calm, chaste, from fear set free,
    His brain in train, with every thought
      And purpose turned to Me.

    With unrelaxed self-discipline,
      With thoughts in stern control,
    He wins tranquillity in Me,
      Wins peace, the final goal.                                     (15)
    But discipline is not for him
      Who no due measure keeps
    In eating or in fasting, or
      Too much or little sleeps.

    Due measure kept in food and sport
      And needful works, due measure
    In sleep and waking, Arjun, sets
      An end to all displeasure.

    When fancy is subdued. and rests
      Entire the soul within,
    When no desires awake desire—
      This is true discipline.

    “The lamp that flickers not, being set
      Where no wind stirs,” shall be
    For a saint whose fancy yields to soul,
      The good old simile.

    When training fetters fancy till
      Its vanishment,
    When man through self beholds the self,
      With self content,

    When he experiences bliss
      That has no end,
    That only intellect—not sense—
      May apprehend,
    That makes, while he abides therein,
      The truth his friend.

    On gaining which, he feels no need
      Of other gain,
    Which holds him safe against the shock
      Of fiercest pain—

    This is the one true discipline
      (True men agree)
    This breaks the yoke of sorrow. This
      Should practiced be
    With resolution and without
      Despondency.

    Let him forget desires that spring
      From fancy, one and all,
    And dominate those village-folk
      That men the senses call,

    So sink to rest, his intellect
      In steadfast tension held,
    His brain subdued to soul, until
      All thought can be expelled.                                    (25)
    Let every door attempted by
      The restless, darting brain,
    Be locked, and soul be lord within,
      All-powerful to constrain.

    He turns pure Spirit. Utter joy
      Creeps on to tranquillize
    His mind who seeks such discipline,
      While sin with passion dies.

    Sin vanishes for him who clings
      To training such as this;
    At one with Spirit, he attains
      With ease an endless bliss.

    He sees himself in every life,
      Sees every life that lives
    Within himself; and so to all
      A like emotion gives.

    Who sees me everywhere, and sees
      In me all lives that be,
    I never can be lost to him,
      Nor he be lost to me.                                           (30)
    So loving me (since life is one)
      In all the lives that be,
    A saint, wherever he abides,
      Will still abide in me.

    Feeling the pain of all the world
      And all its joy within
    Himself, as if his own, he wins
      The perfect discipline.

## Control of the brain is difficult, but possible and necessary

< ARJUNA SAID:

    You bid me, Krishna, gaze on all
      The world with level eye.
    But brain is fickle. What device
      Can steady, fortify?


    Yes, Krishna, brain is fickle, strong,
      And turbulent and bold;
    I find it hard to curb as were
      The wind to catch and hold.

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    No doubt, brave soldier, it is hard
      To curb the wayward brain;
    Yet practice and ascetic life
      Are powerful to constrain.                                      (35)
    I know that it is hard for him
      Who misses self-control;
    Yet are there means for one who strives
      And subjugates his soul.

## Defeat is temporary; one genuinely started on the way will at last attain

< ARJUNA SAID:

    But, Krishna, though a man have faith,
      His faltering thought may stray
    Before perfected discipline—
      What way is his? What way?

    Oh, does he not, like rifted cloud,
      Lose heaven _and_ earth? and stray
    Without support, bewildered, lost
      Upon the Spirit's way?

    Oh, Krishna, cut this doubt or mine,
      Cut it completely through;
    There is no being fit to cut
      This doubt of mine, but you.

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    No; Arjun, he is never lost
      In yonder world or here;
    No man of honest life can sink
      To misery, my dear.

    But, lacking discipline, he dwells
      In pious worlds; and then,
    When long years pass, is born among
      Pure, worthy folk again;

    Or even among the disciplined
      Endowed with wisdom's worth
    (Yet such a family as this
      Is rarely won on earth)

    There once again he enters on
      His former life's direction
    Toward focussed intellect, and strives
      Yet further for perfection.

    His former study bears him on
      Despite his will; since he
    Who yearns for discipline, is borne
      Beyond theology.

    So struggling onward, cleansed of sin,
      His powers in full control,
    Perfected after many births,
      He wins the highest goal—

    A loftier goal than scholarship
      Or bleakest self-constraint
    Or works meticulously done—
      Brave Arjun, be a saint!

    And saintliest among the saints,
      Among all saints that be,
    Is one who fixes faith and love
      And inner soul on Me.


# Canto VII

## Krishna is the material world, but also the spirit of life in the world

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    Be constant. Seek repose in me.
      Let thought to me aspire.
    So learn. brave soldier, how to know
      Me, certain and entire.

    This truth, this wisdom I will now
      Without reserve make clear;
    When this is mastered. there remains
      Naught else worth knowing here.

    One man in many thousands strives
      Perfection's goal to see;
    Of those who strive and win, scarce one
      In very truth knows me.

    Earth. water, ether, fire, and air,
      Intellect, ego, brain:
    This eightfold subdivision serves
      My nature to contain—

    My lower nature, but beyond
      Is one more high and pure—
    The living soul, brave hero, which
      Holds all that lives secure.                                    (5)
    Regard my nature as the womb
      Of all that here draws breath;
    To all the world of life I am
      Creation; I am death.

    Apart from me, brave Arjun, there
      Exists no single thing;
    The universe is strung on me
      Like pearls upon a string.

    I am the taste in water; sound
      In ether; none the less
    Am I the mystic word that gives
      All scriptures power to bless;
    I am the light in moon and sun;
      In man, the manliness;

    I am the fragrance in the earth;
      I am the heat in fire;
    The life in life; the energy
      In men of stern desire;

    I am the everlasting seed
      All forms of life to save;
    I am the wisdom of the wise;
      The courage of the brave;

    I am the strength of those too strong
      For lust or passion's toll;
    And I am pure, permitted love
      Toward every living soul.

    States good and passionate and dark
      Are mine. Yet none should see
    My nature in these states, but should
      Discover them in me.

## The qualities of matter confuse men

    By these three states of matter, all
      This world is led astray
    And knows me not as That beyond
      which passes not away.

    For matter's godlike magic still
      Bewilders to his loss
    The seeker. They who win to me,
      Such seas of magic cross.

    The fool, the sinner, and the mean,
      Not finding me, turn back;
    For magic steals their wisdom, and
      They grow demoniac.                                             (15)
## True knowledge leads to Krishna

    Four kinds of men love me, and bring
      Each his own virtue's prize:
    The oppressed; the student; he who knows
      His object; and the wise.

    The wise with simple faith is best,
      If he but constant be;
    For I am very dear to him,
      And he is dear to me.

    All these are noble, but the wise
      Seems my own self to me;
    To me he clings, the goal than which
      There can no higher be.

    “Krishna is all” his wise thought runs;
      So after many a birth
    He wins to me. But it is rare
      To find such lofty worth.

## Other enthusiasms are not without value; “verily, they have their reward”

    By them whose wisdom passion steals,
      Some other god is found,
    Obeying each his law of life,
      Each by his nature bound.                                       (20)
    Whatever form divine appeals
      To choice and faith and love,
    I fix in each a faith therein
      That naught can shake or move.

    So filled with faith, he strives by prayer
      His reverence to show,
    And thence receives his good desires
      (Which I in truth bestow).

    But finite fruit is all that such
      Small-witted creatures see:
    God-worshippers attain their gods;
      My faithful come to me.

## But only enthusiasm for Krishna has lasting value

    The witless fail to comprehend;
      They think me manifest.
    They little know my nature high,
      Invariable, best.

    For I, in matter's magic hid,
      Elude their best endeavor;
    This world, bewildered, knows not me
      Unborn, unchanging ever.                                        (25)
    All creatures present, past, to be,
    I know. Not one of them knows me.

    Bewildered by the opposites,
      By lust and hatred vexed,
    These creatures, valiant Arjuna,
      All, all are born perplexed.

    Some righteous bid farewell to sin,
      Some few. No more perplexed
    By opposites, they find their faith
      And love for me unvexed.

    Some few who seek my aid, from age
      And death to win salvation,
    Perceive the Spirit, Oversoul,
      And work's full implication.

    Some few whose thoughts are disciplined,
      Who pierce to truth, and deem
    Me highest Being, highest God,
      And Sacrifice supreme,
    These know me even in the hour
      Of life's departing dream.                                      (30)

# Canto VIII

## The course of creative evolution

< ARJUNA SAID:

    What is the Oversoul? and work?
      Spirit? and God most high?
    And what does highest Being, O
      Most lofty, signify?

    What is the Sacrifice supreme?
      How in this body shown?
    And how are you, through self-control,
      At life's departing known?

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    Spirit is the unchanging Best;
      Its essence, Oversoul;
    Work, the creative act whereby
      Life's forms and births unroll.

    The highest Being, changing life;
      The highest God we deem
    Man's soul. And I, incarnate, am
      The Sacrifice supreme.

## The soul goes to that on which it is set at the moment of dissolution

    Doubt not that he will come to me
      Who holds me in his heart
    When life's last hour bids him forsake
      This body, and depart.                                          (5)
    To any form which at the last
      Man's memory holds warm,
    To that. on leaving this. he comes,
      Transformed into its form.

    Therefore in every hour of life
      Remember me, and fight!
    So shall you surely come to me
      With fixèd purpose right.

    Yes, Arjun, he who meditates
      With disciplined design
    And thought that never wavers, wins
      The soul supreme, divine.

    If man recalls this lord of all,
      This poet, ancient, guide,
    Whose form, than atoms subtler, no
      Brave thinking has descried,
    Who gleams with solar color on
      The darkness' further side,

    Recalls him at life's parting hour
      With stubbornest design,
    With powers that discipline and faith
      Unitedly align,
    (Breath checked between his brows) he wins
      That soul supreme, divine.                                      (10)
    The home that sacred students call
      Eternal rest, the same
    That saints may enter when they have
      Extinguished passion's flame,
    For love whereof the saints are chaste,
      I briefly will proclaim.

    Let every door be locked; let brain
      Be subjugate to heart;
    Let discipline unfaltering be;
      Let not the breath depart;

    Let _om_, the sacred syllable,
      With thoughts of me, be chanted:
    To him who leaves the body thus,
      The goal supreme is granted.

## Therefore think on Krishna, that there may be no rebirth

    For him who ever perseveres
      In constant discipline,
    Relaxing not his thought of me,
      I am not hard to win.

    Such noble spirits, finding me,
      Attain perfection. So
    They save themselves from further birth,
      That shifting home of woe.                                      (15)
    From Brahma's world and lesser worlds
      All souls return to earth;
    But none, brave Arjun, finding me,
      Shall suffer further birth.

## Evolution and involution in the mundane periods

    Two thousand ages are a day
      For Brahma, and a night.
    They grasp the sense of night and day
      Who comprehend aright.

    From formlessness all forms proceed
      At dawning of that day;
    And at its dusk, they sink once more
      In formlessness away.

    This world's uncounted, shifting shapes
      Sink helplessly away
    At dusk, and come to life again
      At dawn of Brahma's day.

    But far beyond this seeming world
      Of figures manifest
    There is another, viewless Life
      Eternal. While the rest
    Must perish wholly, it abides,
      By ruin undistressed.                                           (20)
    “Formless,” “Eternal” is its name;
      This is the goal divine;
    They turn not back who have attained
      This highest home of mine.

    This soul, most high yet human, is
      By strict devotion won.
    All lives abide therein; thereby
      Creation's web was spun.

## The yogis who return, and those who do not return

    Now at what time departing, saints
      Return not, or return,
    You shall, O bull of Bharat's breed,
      From my instruction learn.

    The Spirit-conscious who in light
      Or daytime find release,
    By fire, or waxing moon or sun,
      Attain the Spirit's peace;

    While saints who pass through smoke or night,
      By moon or sun awane,
    Dwell for a time in moonlit halls,
      Then come to earth again.                                       (25)
    On these two paths, the bright and dark,
      Life moves forevermore.
    One leads to no returning; one
      Turns as it was before.

    No saint who knows the double path,
      Brave soldier, goes astray;
    Therefore to saintly discipline
      Give every hour and day.

    This truth transports the saint beyond
      All scripture, sacrifice,
    Denial, gifts—all acts that lead
      To virtue's promised price.
    This brings him to securest rest
      In that high home, primeval, blest.

# Canto IX

## Krishna is more than his creation

    THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    This mystery profound, this truth
      And wisdom, I proclaim
    To you who do not quibble. Truth
      Redeems from woe and shame.

    This kingly secret, kingly lore,
      Most lofty and most pure,
    Is given by intuition, is
      Most righteous, pleasant, sure.

    Men lacking faith, brave soldier, in
      This righteous doctrine's worth,
    Not finding me, return to tread
      Death's path in further birth.

    This web of life was spun by me,
      My form unmanifest:
    All living creatures rest in me;
      In them I do not rest.

    Yet see my sovereign magic! They
      Do not abide in me;
    My soul supports them from without,
      And causes them to be.                                          (5)
    Imagine that all creatures move
      In me, as in the still,
    Wide space of ether some great wind
      Moves ever as it will.

    All lives into my substance sink
      At this world's ending. Then,
    When fresh creation comes to pass,
      I give them form again.

    Still constant to my character,
      I evermore create
    Entire, this driven world of life,
      This petty village-state;
    Yet while creating, bid the laws
      Of nature operate.

    Such labors do not fetter me,
      On no reward intent;
    I work detached, observing all
      Like one indifferent.

    So, Arjun, moving things and still
      Are born by nature's laws;
    So rolls the world, my governance
      Being the final cause.                                          (10)
## Devotion to Krishna brings its supreme reward; lesser devotions do not fail of their lesser reward

    But fools contemn this human shape
      Of mine, as something small;
    They little know my form supreme
      As sovereign lord of all.

    Perverted minds! Vain hopes are theirs;
      Their works, their science vain;
    Such goblin nature, impish thought
      Sinks to the mere insane.

    But godlike natures, noble minds
      Perceive and worship me,
    The everlasting source of all,
      With plain sincerity.

    With praises still renewed, with stern
      And still renewed endeavor,
    With love and worship they approach,
      Intent and constant ever.

    Yet others bring the offering
      Of truth, so strive to reach
    Me as the One, or me Apart,
      Or Diverse-faced for each.                                      (15)
    I am each varied sacrifice;
      Each hymn the Brahmans sing;
    The holy herb, oblation, ghee:
      The fire, the offering;

    I am the father of the world;
      Its grandsire, mother, lord;
    Truth, purity, and sacred spell;
      Hymn, chant, and holy word;

    Its way, its witness, master, king;
      Its refuge, home, and friend;
    Its treasure, base, eternal seed;
      Its maker, and its end.

    I give and I withhold the rain;
      I tum the cold to hot;
    Undying life am I, and death;
      What is, and what is not.

    The worthy scholar-ritualist
      Begs trips to Paradise,
    And gains that pious world of gods
      As fruit of sacrifice,
    Enjoys with gods in heaven at least
    Some portion of the heavenly feast;                               (20)
    Then, having tasted luxuries
      In heaven, he must go
    (His merit waning) back to earth;
      So journeys to and fro,
    Intent on scripture, nothing higher—
      Desires awaken his desire.

    But when a man approaches Me
      With anxious thought sincere
    And unrelaxing discipline,
      I guard his welfare here.

    They, too, who worship other gods,
      With love and faith shot through,
    Brave Arjun, worship me, although
      They know not what they do.

    Since I must test all offerings
      And govern all,
    These fail to know me as I am;
      So, climbing, fall.

    For, giving worship to the gods,
      To gods they go;
    Or, if to dead progenitors,
      Are even so;

    Those come to ghosts who supplicate
      What ghosts there be;
    And they who bring me sacrifice,
      Come unto me.                                                   (25)
## The lowliest may approach Krishna, and the meanest offering is acceptable

    If any, moved by utter love,
      Is minded me to bring
    A leaf, a flower, fruit, water, I
      Receive love's offering.

    Whatever, prince, you do or eat
      Or give in charity.
    Endure or sacrifice, let all
      Be done as unto me.

    So freed from bonds of work, from fruits
      Both good and evil free.
    Renouncing or performing, you
      Shall enter into me.

    I look on life with level eye;
      I have no foe nor friend;
    Yet they are mine, and I in them
      Who love me to the end.

    Yes, even the most complete of rogues
      In whom no passions fight
    With love of me, is deemed a saint,
      Because his heart is right.                                     (30)
    Soon virtue enters into him;
      Enduring peace draws nigh;
    Oh, never doubt, brave Arjuna,
      My faithful do not die.

    Yes, hero, if they rest in me,
      Those whom we basest deem,
    With women, men of business, serfs,
      Attain the goal supreme;

    Far more, a pious Brahman or
      A wise, devoted king.
    Doomed to a transient, suffering world,
      Bring me love's offering!

    Give thought, love, homage, sacrifice
      To me, your final goal;
    So shall you surely come to me
      With fixed and steadfast soul.


# Canto X

## Krishna is the source of all; in knowing him, one knows all

    THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    Brave soldier, hear my lofty speech;
      Let more be understood,
    Because it pleases you, and I
      Desire to do you good.

    The heavenly hosts, the greatest seers
      Know not my origin,
    Since all the gods and seers proceed
      From me, in me begin.

    But any mortal, knowing me
      Unborn, beginningless,
    The world's high master, is made free
      Of doubt and sinfulness.

    Wit, wisdom, unperplexity,
      Compassion, truth, and peace,
    Restraint, pain, pleasure, birth, and death,
      Dismay, dismay's surcease,

    The generous heart, the level eye,
      Denial, charity,
    Content, fame, infamy—are states
      That life derives from me.                                      (5)
    The mighty seers, the ancient seven,
      And four primeval men
    Proceed from mental states of mine
      To shape creation then.

    Knowing this far-flung power of mine
      And magic as it is,
    Man wins unwavering discipline—
      There is no doubt of this.

    That all things find their origin
      In me, from me proceed,
    The enlightened know; their worship and
      Their love attest their creed.

    Thoughts, lives are mine; they speak of me
      Again and yet again;
    So edify each other; so
      Are glad and happy men.

    In worship, love, and discipline
      They evermore agree;
    And I bestow intelligence
      Whereby they come to me.                                        (10)
    Self-centered, yet compassionate,
      I finally destroy
    Unwisdom's darkness with the lamp
      Of wisdom's radiant joy.

## Krishna is the seed and the perfection of all that is

< ARJUNA SAID:

    O Spirit lofty and most pure!
      High home of souls forlorn!
    Eternal man and primal god!
      Celestial king unborn!

    The god-seers Narad, Devala,
      And Vyasa give to you
    Such names, with Asit and the rest;
      And you declare them true.

    All this, most blessèd Krishna, I
      Perceive as true indeed;
    Ah! Neither gods nor devils know
      How forms from you proceed.

    Yourself alone can know yourself
      As soul most high, as cause
    And lord of life, as god of gods,
      As source of mundane laws.                                      (15)
    Oh, tell me all—each far-flung power,
      Each godlike revelation,
    Whereby you evermore uphold
      And permeate creation.

    Oh, teach me modes of constant thought
      To know you, though afar,
    The likenesses, most blessèd saint,
      That hint at what you are.

    Yes, tell me all your magic power
      That regulates this stuff
    Of life. For of your nectar-speech
      I cannot hear enough.

    THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    Come then! I will proclaim what my
      Self-revelations mean—
    In chiefest part, brave prince. For else
      No ending would be seen.

    I am the soul that dwells within,
      Life's essence to defend;
    I am the origin of life,
      Its middle, and its end.                                        (20)
    Vishnu am I; I am the sun
      Bright-rayed; the moonlight there
    Among the stars; I am the storm
      Among the gods of air.

    I am the chant among the hymns;
      Among the gods, their king;
    For nerves, the brain; and consciousness
      For every living thing;

    Among devourers, Shiva; cash
      For trolls' and gnomes' desire;
    Mount Meru for the mountain-peaks;
      Among the fire-gods, fire.

    Of chaplains, I am heaven's priest;
      Among the lakes, the sea;
    Among all generals, regard
      The god of war as me.

    Of words, the sacred _om_; of seers,
      Great Bhrigu's name I bear;
    Himalaya among the hills;
      Of sacrifices, prayer.                                          (25)
    Of trees, I am the sacred fig;
      Narad among the wise;
    The chief of music-makers, and
      Those who philosophize.

    Of steeds, I am the godlike steed
      Born of the ambrosial sea;
    Behold the king of men, and heaven's
      Great elephant in me.

    The serpent-king and wonder-cow
      Am I, of snakes and kine;
    Of missile arms, the thunderbolt;
      Creative love divine;

    Of water-powers, the water-king;
      Of them who rest from breath,
    Their chief; of snakes, the endless worm;
      Among constrainers, death;

    Of demons, wise Prahlada; and
      Of birds, the feathered scion
    Of Vinata; of reckoners, time;
      And of all beasts, the lion;                                    (30)
    Of cleansers, wind; the crocodile
      Of life that ocean teems;
    Among the warriors, Rama; and
      Ganges among the streams.

    I am creations' origin,
      Continuance, and goal;
    The speaker's speech; of sciences,
      That of the Oversoul.

    Of compounds, I the dual am;
      Of letters, I am A;
    The all-watchful governor; and time
      That never wastes away.

    Imperious death am I, and birth
      Of creatures yet to be;
    Among things reckoned feminine,
      You may behold in me
    Speech, glory, courage, patience, fame,
      Shrewdness, and memory.

    The greatest chant; the metre with
      The most melodious swing;
    Of months, I am December; and
      Of seasons, I am spring.

    Among deceivers, I am dice;
      Conquest, and hardihood;
    The valor of the valorous;
      The goodness of the good.

    Krishna am I, and Arjuna,
      Each in his princely line;
    Of sages, Vyasa; Ushanas
      Among the bards divine;

    The victors' strategy; the rod
      Of them who must chastise;
    The secrecy of secrets; and
      The wisdom of the wise.

    Life's seed am I, brave Arjuna,
      Wherever life may be:
    Not one, of moving things or still,
      Has substance save through me.

    And so my far-flung powers divine,
      Bold soldier, know no stint;
    But such detail as has been heard,
      Is offered as a hint.                                           (40)
    Wherever life has vigor, grace,
      Or glory's magic flower,
    Derive its special splendor from
      Some fragment of my power.

    Yet why dilate? What needs it thus
      At reason's bound to chafe?
    One fragment holds this world of life
      Entire, unruffled, safe.


# Canto XI

## Krishna's transfiguration

< ARJUNA SAID:

    Your lofty, secret doctrine which
      The Oversoul explains,
    Has laid a blessing on me. No
      Perplexity remains.

    Life's birth and passing I have heard
      Detailed, a wondrous story,
    O flower-eyed being, and your own
      Imperishable glory.

    I do not doubt. But oh that I
      Your sovereign figure might espy,
    Your veritable form descry
      As lord supreme, as soul most high!

    Reveal, if possible and right—
    O magic's master, lord of might!
    Your changeless self to human sight.

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    By hundreds and by thousands then,
      Prince of a warlike line,
    In all their colors, kinds, and shapes,
      Behold my forms divine.                                         (5)
    Behold the godlike shapes of sun,
      Wind, terror, wealth, and healing,
    With many miracles of form
      At this their first revealing.

    Behold the total world of life,
      All moving things and still,
    Within my body; and therewith
      Whatever else you will.

    Yet may you not regard my form
      With human vision; so,
    As magic's master, I will now
      Celestial sight bestow.

< SANJAYA SAID,

    And having spoken, Krishna, as
      Master of magic's dream,
    Revealed to wondering Arjuna
      His sovereign form supreme

    With countless aspects, faces, eyes,
      With countless gems divine,
    With countless heavenly missiles,high
      Uplifted for a sign,                                            (10)
    Divinely perfumed, wreathed, and clad,
      All miracles embracing,
    An infinite divinity
      Toward every quarter facing.

    A thousand simultaneous suns
      Arising in the sky
    Might equal that great radiance,
      With that great glory vie.

    Within the god of gods, the prince
      Beheld all life unveil,
    Beheld this world of life compact
      In infinite detail.

    Amazement entered him; his hair
      Rose up; he bowed his head;
    He humbly lifted folded hands,
      And worshipped God, and said.

< ARJUNA SAID:

    Lord God, within you I behold
      All gods together driven,
    With throngs of diverse shapes to which
      The breath of life is given,
    Lord Brahma on his lotus-throne,
      All seers and snakes of heaven.                                 (15)
    I see a figure infinite
      Wherein all figures blend;
    To countless bodies, arms, and eyes,
      And faces, I attend,
    But fail, O lord of all, to find
      Beginning, middle, end.

    The discus, mace, and diadem
      I see; see glory massed
    In flashing radiance whereby
      My sight is overcast;
    See flaring fires and flaming suns
      Immeasurably vast.

    I deem you source and focus of
      This universe's plan;
    Invariable truth supreme;
      The changeless partisan
    Of virtue's immemorial laws;
      The everlasting man.

    Beginning, middle, end are not;
      Your jaws are flaming fire;
    Your endless power and countless arms
      Are given to admire;
    Your eyes are moon and sun; you burn
      This helpless world entire.

    Your form is awful, marvellous,
      Coterminous with space;
    You clasp the interval from heaven
      To earth in one embrace;
    Beholding you, the triple world
      Is shaken, crown to base.                                       (20)
    And yonder gods are drawn within
      Your person; they adore,
    In humble hosts, your majesty,
      Though some are frightened sore;
    And chants of “Hail! All hail!” swell up
      From saints and sages hoar.

    The gods of terror, wealth, and sun,
      Of healing, and of air,
    The All-gods, the perfectibles,
      Angels, and ghosts are there,
    While crowding trolls and imps and saints
      In bland amazement stare.

    O master, these your mouths and eyes
      All numbering defy;
    Your arms, thighs, bellies, feet, and fangs
      Most horrid multiply;
    The worlds are shaken, viewing this
      Dread presence, as am I.

    Viewing this particolored form
      That streaks the clouds with light,
    Its jaws agape, great Vishnu, and
      Its great eyes gleaming bright,
    The soul within me quakes; my peace
      And fortitude take flight.

    Beholding these your jaws, fierce-fanged
      As flames of judgment day,
    I know not where to turn; all sense
      Of safety fades away.
    Life's only refuge! Lord of gods!
      Be merciful, I pray.                                            (25)
    See yonder! Dhritarashtra's sons
      With all their hostile throng
    Of kings, with Bhishma, Drona, and
      With honored Karna strong,
    And with the chiefest captains that
      In our stout ranks belong,

    Are entering with hurried step
      Your jaws fierce-fanged and dread,
    While here and there between the teeth
      I spy a mangled head.

    As many rivers' rushing streams
      Sink in one sea, so these
    Within the jaws that flame and wait—
      No human hero flees.

    As moths to their destruction in
      The kindled taper fly,
    So all the world is pressed to plunge
      Within your jaws, and die.

    The flaming tongues within your mouths
      Lick ever and devour
    The total world of lesser life,
      While gleams that glow and glower,
    Great Vishnu, penetrate that world
      And burn with awful power.                                      (30)
    Oh, tell me to what goal divine
      Such fearful visions tend.
    O god primeval, god of gods!
      Most mercifully send
    Enlightenment; for deeds like these
      I cannot comprehend.

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    Death am I, and my present task
      Destruction. View in me
    The active slayer of these men;
      For though you fail and flee,
    These captains of the hostile hosts
      Shall die, shall cease to be.

    Arise, on fame, on victory,
      On kingly joys intent!
    They are already slain by me;
      Be you the instrument.

    Yes, Drona, Bhishma, Jayadrath,
      Kama, with every foe
    Who stands your rival in the field,
      Are doomed, and now lie low.
    Then banish pain and slay the slain!
      To fight and conquest go!

< SANJAYA SAID:

    Then trembling Arjun clasped his hands
      And bowed his crested head,
    Paid fearful worship once again,
      And stammered as he said.                                       (35)
< ARJUNA SAID:

    With reason, Krishna, in your praise
      Is joy and comfort found,
    While frightened goblins seek in flight
      The far horizon's bound.
    While from all hosts of sainted souls
      Your glories still resound.

    Why should they not bend lowly down
      To Brahma's worthier mate,
    Prime mover, boundless, god of gods,
      Imperishably great,
    Life's home, embracing more than all
      Things formed and uncreate?

    Eternal man and primal god!
      Forms infinite in one!
    The truth and knower of the truth
      Are you. By you begun,
    In you reposes all. Through you
      Creation's web was spun.

    Wind, water, moon, and fire, and death
      Are you; the father hoar
    Who rules the world, and Brahma's self.
      Let all that lives adore
    A thousand times and sing your praise
      Again and evermore.

    Praise be to you before, behind!
      Be praise on every side!
    No circumscription of your power
      Or prowess is descried.
    For you are all, and all is you:
      All things in you abide.                                        (40)
    And if in flippant comradeship
      I ever cried: “My friend!
    Dear Krishna! Yadu's son!” did not
      This glory apprehend,
    If I did ever in my love
      Or heedlessness offend,

    If ever I degraded you
      (Alone, or others by)
    To make a jest while you relaxed,
      Slept, sat, or feasted nigh,
    Forgive me, god invincibly,
      Immeasurably high!

    You are the father of the world
      Both still and animate;
    Its teacher honored and revered;
      Incomparably great.
    Dare any in the triple world
      Lay claim to rival state?

    I therefore cast my body down
      (Lord God, be glorified!)
    And humbly pray for mercy, pray
      You feel forbearance wide
    As sire to son, as friend to friend,
      As lover to his bride.

    I thrill with pride at having seen
      What none has seen before,
    O god of gods, life's only home!
      Yet am I shaken sore
    With diffidence. Be merciful!
      Appear as man once more!                                        (45)
    On discus, mace, and diadem
      My gaze was gladly bent;
    Though every form be free to you,
      A thousand arms be lent,
    Appear as in the days of old
      With normal complement.

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    Brave Arjuna, my grace revealed
      This vision's magic dream,
    Primeval, omnipresent, true
      Behind the parts that seem;
    And none but you has e'er beheld
      This radiant form supreme.

    And none among mankind but you,
      Heroic prince, may see
    This form, however good his gifts
      Or pious acts may be,
    His scripture, study, sacrifice,
      Or bleak austerity.

    Let not this figure great and grim
      Perplex or pain you more;
    Be fearless, comforted; behold
      Me as I was before.

< SANJAYA SAID:

    Herewith by Krishna once again
      His former form was taken;
    And kindly great, he comforted
      The spirit terror-shaken.                                       (50)
< ARJUNA SAID:

    Beholding, Krishna, once again
      A human figure kind,
    I reassume my mastery
      Of character and mind.

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    The form that you have now beheld
      Is hardly to be seen;
    And to perceive it, gods above
      Are pierced with longing keen.

    The glimpse of me that you have caught
      Is purchased for no price
    Of scripture, bleak austerities,
      Of gifts, or sacrifice.

    It is, heroic Arjuna,
      Through sincere love alone
    That I may penetrated be,
      Be seen, and truly known.

    Who does my work with utter love,
      From all attachments free
    And free from hate of any life,
      Brave soldier, comes to Me.                                     (55)
# Canto XII

## Worship of Krishna is on the whole better than worship of the Absolute, for it is more conformable to man's nature

< ARJUNA SAID:

    Some bring you love and discipline—
      But are they more astute
    Than those who bring devotion to
      The formless Absolute?

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    Those who, disclosing utter faith,
      Discover mental rest
    In me through constant discipline,
      Appear to me the best.

    While those who serve the Absolute—
      Eluding thought, and strange
    To rational presentment, fixed,
      Formless, beyond the range
    Of local limitation, free
      From motion or from change—

    These, level-eyed to all the world,
      Their senses in control,
    Attain to me at last, when they
      Wish well to every soul.

    Yet greater pain is theirs who fix
      The Absolute in mind:
    For men with bodies, absolutes
      Are hard to track and find.                                     (5)
## Practice devotion to Krishna. either with intuition, concentration, works, or at least renunciation

    Whoever pledge all works to me,
      Who hold me very dear,
    Who bring me meditative love
      With discipline sincere,

    To them I come with rescue prompt;
      I save them from the sea
    Of lives that end in death, while they
      Fix every thought on me.

    Then fix your brain on me alone,
      Reflective thought on me;
    So shall you dwell in me at last
      With no uncertainty.

    And if the wavering thought rebels,
      Prince of a conquering line,
    By concentrated study strive
      To sink your life in mine.

    If concentration fails, submit
      Yourself to works' direction;
    Since he who works as unto me,
      May also win perfection.                                        (10)
    If even so you fail, if joy,
      In me be not increased,
    Renounce the fruit of every work—
      Control your soul at least.

    For wisdom ever teaches
      What study never can;
    And self-communion reaches
      Beyond shrewd wisdom's span:
    Self-counsel will engender
      A spirit free from greed
    For fruits of labor, render
      The man serene indeed.

## The reward is Krishna's love

    The man who hates no living thing,
      Kind, patient, and humane,
    Unselfish, unpretentious, calm
      In pleasure as in pain,

    Content, controlled, and disciplined,
      From wavering fancies free,
    Whose brain and intellect and love
      Are mine, is dear to me.

    Abhorring none, by none abhorred,
      Whom fear and fever flee
    With triumph and intolerance,
      He too is dear to me.                                           (15)
    He who, uncalculating, deft,
      Scorning ambition's fee,
    Impartial, pure, and unperturbed,
      Loves me, is dear to me.

    And he who neither grieves nor yearns,
      Released from hate and glee,
    Devotedly renouncing good
      And ill, is dear to me.

    Who looks alike on foe and friend,
      Pain, pleasure, heat and cold,
    Who levels honor and disgrace,
      Whom no attachments hold,

    With equal thought for praise and blame,
      Content with what may be,
    Devout, firm, silent, and unhoused—
      That man is dear to me.

    And they who pay (as here made clear)
      Immortal virtue's fee,
    Whose love and zeal and faith I feel,
      Are wondrous dear to me.                                        (20)

# Canto XIII

## The body, called the field; the soul, called the knower if the field; and knowledge, which consists in right discrimination between them

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID,

    This body, Arjuna, is amed
      “The field” for learnèd ends;
    And “knower of the field” is called
      The soul that comprehends.

    To know the knower and the field,
      The one true knowledge yields;
    And know me, valiant Arjuna,
      As knower of all fields.

    Now learn concisely of the field,
      Its nature, phases, source;
    Learn also what the knower is,
      His character and force.

    Of this the seers, in divers hymns,
      Delighted once to sing;
    And well-known philosophic texts
      Show cogent reasoning.

## The constituents of the field

    The unmanifest, the elements,
      Intellect, ego, brain,
    Five powers of sense, and functions five,
      Perception's fivefold plane,                                    (5)
    Pain, pleasure, consciousness,desire,
      Hate, unity, and pride—
    Subsume the field concisely, both
      Intact and modified.

## The constituents of wisdom

    A spirit modest, just, sincere,
      A generous, patient soul,
    Respect for teachers, purity,
      Steadfastness, self-control,

    A mind unpricked by things of sense
      And free from vauntings vain,
    Clear view of evils found in birth,
      Death, age, disease, and pain,

    Detachment, independence of
      Wife, children, house, and things,
    Thought equable in welcome and
      Unwelcome happenings,

    Unwavering devotion, sure
      Of me as highest good,
    Distaste for social gatherings,
      A love of solitude,                                             (10)
    Absorption in the Oversoul,
      The simple power to prize
    Truth's essence—this is wisdom, and
      What differs, is unwise.

## The characteristics of living knowledge

    I now explain what object is
      Worth knowing, being rated
    As surety of immortal life—
      The Spirit uncreated,
    Whereof “It is” and “It is not”
      Are both untruly stated.

    In hands and feet ubiquitous,
      And in unnumbered eyes,
    In heads, mouths, ears for all the world,
      Its omnipresence lies.

    Supporting, without contact, all;
      Enjoying things of sense
    Without an organ; matter-free,
      Yet with experience;

    Though moving, still; without, and yet
      Within all things that are;
    Too subtle for perception; near
      At hand, yet distant far;                                       (15)
    Though undivided, yet it seems
      To act through living flesh;
    Supporting life, devouring life,
      Creating life afresh.

    It is the light of lights; the dark
      It only can dispel;
    ’Tis wisdom's self, and wisdom's hope,
      And wisdom's goal as well;
    And in the heart of everyone
      It dearly loves to dwell.

    With due concision, such are field,
      Wisdom, and wisdom's fee;
    My devotee who comprehends
      Is fit to enter Me.

## The nature of matter and soul

    Next, learn of matter and of soul
      Which both precede creation;
    Discern then matter's elements
      And curious mutation.

    Production, product, agency
      Are matter's set domain;
    The soul endures experience
      Of pleasure and of pain.                                        (20)
    The soul, in matter dwelling, tastes
      That elemental food;
    Taste so acquired results in births
      From evil wombs or good.

    In dwelling thus, the lofty soul
      Is named the self, or he
    Who tastes, supports, rules, witnesses,
      Or suffers what may be.

    Whatever be his life, the man
      Who comprehends the worth
    Of matter, elements, and soul,
      Endures no further birth.

## The different roads to salvation

    Some find the self within the self
      Through self-communion still;
    A second group, through intellect;
      And others through the will;
    While some, through discipline of works,
      The needful task fulfil.

    And some, less gifted, worship that
      Whereof their ears have heard;
    They also vanquish death, who trust
      The authoritative Word.                                         (25)
## Discrimination between the field and the knower of the field is salvation

    Whenever moving things or still
      Are seen new life to yield,
    Perceive a combination of
      A knower and his field.

    Who sees in all the lord of all,
      Sees level life proceed
    Immortal in mortality,
      That man has sight indeed.

    Discovering the Lord supreme
      At home in every soul,
    The self no longer wrongs the self,
      So wins the highest goal.

    When man discerns all actions done
      Through matter's power alone,
    By him the passive spectator—
      The soul—is truly known.

    He wins his Spirit home, when he
      Perceives how difference
    Melts into unity, and takes
      Diverse appearance thence.                                      (30)
    Soul, changeless, passive, and supreme,
      Discarnate, uncreated,
    May dwell within the body, yet
      Be uncontaminated.

    As ether penetrates the whole
      Yet subtly shrinks from stain,
    So soul is stainless in its wide
      Corporeal domain.

    The sun is single, yet to him
      All darknesses must yield:
    And so, brave prince, one knower can
      Illuminate his field.

    Distinguishing the knower and
      The field with wisdom's eye,
    And life's release from matter, man
      Attains the goal most high.


# Canto XIV

## Krishna is the mystical father of all beings

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    Once more I tell that wisdom which
      Of wisdoms is the best,
    Through which all seers have passed beyond
      This life to perfect rest.

    They gain a likeness to myself,
      Such wisdom still amassing:
    They are not born when worlds are born,
      Nor pained when worlds are passing.

    The mighty Spirit is the womb
      Wherein I lay the seed:
    Such is the origin of life,
      O prince of Bharat's breed.

    Whatever mothers seem to bear
      This world of form entire,
    The mighty Spirit is the womb;
      And I, the seeding sire.

## Goodness, passion, and darkness

    Now goodness, passion, darkness roam
      As elements in matter's home;
    In bodies, hero, their control
      Forever fetters changeless soul.                                (5)
    And goodness, bringing light and health,
      Is luminously bright;
    It fetters by attachment to
      High wisdom and delight.

    While in ambitious passion, greed
      Self-interested lurks;
    It fetters soul, brave hero, by
      An eagerness for works.

    But all-bewildering darkness springs
      From folly's deepest deep;
    It fetters soul by heedlessness,
      By indolence, and sleep.

    Thus goodness, passion, darkness dense
    Attach by joy, works, negligence.

    When goodness conquers passion and
      The darkness, it prevails;
    So passion, or so darkness rules,
      When its twin rival fails.           (1O)

    When wisdom's clarifying lamp
      Shines bright at all the gates
    With which this body is supplied,
      Goodness predominates.

    Action, a restless zeal for works,
      Strong appetite, and greed
    Appear when passion dominates,
      O bull of Bharat's breed.

    Murkiness, apathy, and sloth,
      Bewildered judgments wrong,
    Appear, O joy of Kuru's line,
      When darkness is too strong.

    If goodness dominates a man,
      Then, when the body dies,
    The soul attains a stainless world
      Where all are wondrous wise.

    In passion dying, he is born
      Where busybodies rule;
    And if he dies in darkness, he
      Is mothered by a fool.                                          (15)
    From goodness issues work well done,
      Serenely free from stain;
    Stupidity is darkness' fruit;
      And passion's fruit is pain.

    From goodness, wisdom comes to birth;
      From passion issues greed;
    From darkness, sloth, perplexity,
      Stupidity proceed.

    The good rise high; the passionate
      Remain on middle ground;
    The dark, in matter's meanest part
      Entangled fast, are downed.

    When sages see no actor save
      The elements, and see
    The soul beyond the elements,
      They enter into me.

    Transcending these three elements
      Within the body, soul
    Set free from birth, death, age, and pain,
      Wins its immortal goal.                                         (20)
## The character of him who is beyond goodness, passion, and darkness

< ARJUNA SAID:

    How recognize, O Lord, the man
      Who is not matter's slave—
    Or how does he transcend the three?
      And how does he behave?

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    Light, and activity, brave prince,
      And dull perplexity
    He does not hate when present, nor
      Desire them when they flee.

    Like one who sits indifferent by,
      From matter's impact safe,
    He sees the elements at work,
      Is calm, and does not chafe.

    Then praise and censure, pleasure, pain
      Find him serenely bold;
    The glad and sad he rates alike,
      A clod, a stone, and gold.

    He looks alike on foe and friend,
      On honor and offense;
    Renounces all ambition; so
      Transcends the elements.

    And he who worships Me with strict,
      Fond thoughts that never roam,
    Transcends these elements, and grows
      Fit for his Spirit home.

    For I am Spirit's base, without
      Mortality's alloy;
    The base of endless virtue, of
      Invariable joy.

# Canto XV

## The tree of life

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    With roots in heaven, thence branching down,
      The eternal banyan grows,
    With hymns as leaves. Who knows that tree,
      The heart of scripture knows.

    Upward and down stretch branches, fed
      By matter's elements;
    The lower roots entwine to form
      Reticulations dense
    That tangle men in labor's net;
      The twigs are things of sense.

    Not so its form, beginning, end,
      And soil on earth are seen.
    When those tough roots are severed by
      Detachment's sword-blade keen,

    Then seek that bourne whence none return
      Who win thereto, who can
    Declare: “I take my refuge in
      This primal soul of man
    From which the flood of ordered life
      Flowed forth when time began.”

    When base attachment, folly, pride,
      Desire have run their course,
    When opposites of pleasure and
      Affliction forfeit force,
    Man in the Oversoul is blest:
    Clear-eyed, he wins abiding rest.                                 (5)
## Manifested life is but a part of life

    In that high home, no sun is seen,
      No moon has need to shine,
    Nor any fire. They turn not back
      Who reach that home of mine.

    All living souls proceed from me
      Immortal. They remain
    A space, and draw from matter five
      Sense-organs and a brain.

    With these the body's lord in time
      Departs again to roam
    As roams a breeze with perfumes snatched
      Each from its native home.

    Sight, hearing, touch, and taste, and smell
      He dominates; and hence
    Enjoys through them and through the brain
      The varied world of sense.

    While he enjoys the things of sense,
      Or deigns to stay, or fly,
    The blinded see him not; but some
      Perceive with wisdom's eye.                                     (10)
    The saint who strives discovers him
      Within the self. But he
    Who does not rule his spirit, strives
      In vain and foolishly.

## Which in its fulness is in Krishna

    In glory that is in the sun,
      And in the moon, and fire,
    Behold my glory, shining on
      This world of life entire.

    I animate the earth, support
      All creatures by my powers;
    And, as the virile king of plants,
      Give life to all that flowers.

    I am the vital fire within
      All breathing bodies; blent
    With outward breath and inward, I
      Digest all nourishment.

    Wisdom and memory are mine,
      False judgments to dispel;
    I know all scriptures' sense and pith;
      Of me all scriptures tell;
    And in the heart of everyone
      I dearly love to dwell.                                         (15)
    Two spirits move this present world:
      The first is that which ranges
    Through all the forms of finite life;
      The second knows no changes.

    Beyond them both, another dwells,
      Called Soul transcendent, or
    The immanent supporter, the
      Eternal governor.

    Since I transcend the first and rule
      The second as his lord,
    My name on earth is Man most high,
      And in the sacred word.

    Who knows me thus as Man most high,
      Knows all. And fancy-free,
    He brings devotion, noble prince,
      Brings all he has to me.

    This is the central mystery;
      Thereto when man has won,
    O blameless soldier, he is wise,
      Has done what need be done.                                     (20)

# Canto XVI

## The nature of the godlike

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    A generous spirit, upright, strict;
      Pluck; purity within;
    Study; self-conquest; sacrifice;
      Strong, wise self-discipline;

    A truthful spirit, slow to wrath,
      Detached, just, peaceful, kind;
    Good-will to life; a lack of greed;
      A shy, firm, gentle mind;

    A radiant spirit, patient, pure;
      A loyal valor sage—
    Are his, brave prince, succeeding to
      The godlike heritage.

    Pride, wrath, conceit, hypocrisy,
      Harsh thought, and judgment slack
    Descend on him whose birth entails
      The fate demoniac.

    The godlike fate enfranchises,
      The impish fetters man.
    Grieve not, brave soldier. You were born
      To test the godlike plan.                                       (5)
## The nature and fate of the demoniac

    There are two races in the world,
      The impish, the divine;
    The godlike having been described,
      The imps are to define.

    These impish persons cannot act
      Nor leave the world alone;
    To them no truth, no character,
      No purity is known.

    They say there is no God, no truth
      In life, no basic laws,
    No mutual dependence, naught
      But greed as final cause.

    They obstinately lose their souls
      But use their petty wit
    In cruel deeds, destroying life
      And ever hating it.

    They sail the seas of lust, equipped
      With passion, pride, deceit:
    Perverted are their purposes;
      Their actions are not sweet.                                    (10)
    Till death cries halt, they lucubrate
      Immense ambitions fond.
    Desires engulf them; they believe
      That nothing lies beyond.

    Hope's hundred meshes tangle them;
      They sink in wrath and lust;
    To satisfy desire, they seek
      Great hoards of wealth unjust.

    “Here's something that I got today,
      And that I'll get tomorrow;
    This money's mine, and more will come:
      I shall not need to borrow.

    “I killed that man I didn't like,
      And I will kill the next.
    I set a gorgeous table; I
      Am perfect, strong, unvexed.

    “Does any rival me in birth?
      I'll make a sacrifice,
    Be very generous, enjoy
      Myself. I have the price.”
    Such inebriety of thought
      Inspires their foolish vice.                                    (15)
    So fluttering from plan to plan
      While greed and passion swell,
    Enmeshed, ensnared in folly's web,
      They plunge to filthy hell.

    Fanatically proud of wealth,
      Stiff-necked, and self-esteeming,
    They make pretended sacrifice
      Deceitful, unbeseeming.

    In pride, wrath, passion, violence,
      And self-conceit they labor,
    Malignant, hating Me within
      Themselves and in their neighbor.

    These bitter, base, and brutal foes
      I evermore send back
    (Through life's recurrent round) to birth
      In wombs demoniac.

    And so, conceived in impishness,
      Perplexed from birth to birth,
    They do not come to me, but tread
      A lower spot than earth—                                        (20)
    A hell whose triple gate is named
      Passion and Greed and Hate,
    Destructive of the soul of man:
      Oh, shun that triple gate!

    Oh, shun the triple gate of gloom,
      Prince of a famous line,
    Work out your soul's salvation, and
      Attain the goal divine!

    But he who scorns the holy law
      Through headstrong, fond design,
    Will miss perfection, happiness,
      And final goal divine.

    Then make the Law your guiding law
      To fix the wrong and right:
    So do your earthly task, your mind
      Illumined by that light.


# Canto XVII

## The three kinds of faith, depending on goodness, passion, and darkness

< ARJUNA SAID:

    Some sacrifice without the law,
      Yet full of faith. And should
    Their state be reckoned, Krishna, as
      Dark, passionate, or good?

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    Three faiths there are, and each is stamped
      With nature's living mark:
    I now describe them by the names
      Good, passionate, and dark.

    From native nature every life
      Its special faith receives;
    For man is fashioned from his faith,
      And is what he believes.

    The good serve gods; the passionate
      Serve troll and goblin hosts;
    And some—the dark-bring sacrifice
      To dead men and to ghosts.

    Some practice grim austerities
      That wrench the scripture's sense
    With self-conceit, hypocrisy,
      Lust, passion, violence.                                        (5)
    They torture matter's elements
      And me who dwell within
    Their bodies, following a mad,
      An impish discipline.

## The three kinds of food

    I now describe the kind of food
      That pleases one of three;
    Their offerings; austerities;
      And threefold charity.

    Where vigor, life, power, comfort, health,
      Content are strengthened, food
    Bland, solid, cordial, savory
      Is relished by the good.

    Foods bitter, pungent, salt, and hot,
      That bite, burn, animate,
    That cause discomfort, pain, disease,
      Delight the passionate.

    The darkness-dominated still
      The cravings of the maw
    With leavings, things impure or stale,
      Decaying, tasteless, raw.                                       (10)
## The three kinds of sacrifice

    When sacrifice is offered up
      In no self-seeking mood
    But dutifully, lawfully,
      That sacrifice is good.

    Where there is selfish tendency
      Or ostentatious fashion,
    We recognize, most noble prince,
      The sacrifice of passion.

    Where text and fee and gifts of food
      Are lacking, where the mark
    Of faith is absent, and of law,
      The sacrifice is dark.

## The three kinds of penance

    Pure manners, upright, harmless, chaste;
      Homage to sages wise,
    To teachers, Brahmans, gods—that way
      The body's penance lies.

    Speech pleasant, friendly, true, whereby
      Excitement is not stirred,
    And constant use of holy texts—
      Is penance of the word.                                         (15)
    Sedateness, silence, self-control,
      Consideration kind,
    And inner purity, compose
      The penance of the mind.

    This triple penance, done by men
      With lofty faith endued
    And self-forgetful discipline,
      Deserves the name of good.

    A penance arrogant, or done
      For honors, pride, or state,
    Unfocussed and impermanent,
      Is here dubbed passionate.

    When penance is self-torture and
      Conceived in folly stark,
    Or aimed at ruin of a foe,
      It takes the name of dark.

## The three kinds of charity

    A gift dispensed in duty's name
      To one who cannot pay,
    Well-placed, well-timed, and well-bestowed,
      Is good, the sages say.                                         (20)
    When gifts are given in hope of gain
      Or for some counter-fee,
    Or proffered under self-constraint,
      Note passion's charity.

    Gifts offered with discourtesy
      Or insolently thrown,
    Ill-placed, ill-timed, and ill-bestowed,
      As darkness' gifts are known.

## The mystical utterance _om tat sat_

    The Spirit's triple symbol is
      The mystic “Om, That, True”
    And Brahmans, scriptures, sacrifice
      Stand from of old therethrough.

    Hence, they who speak the Spirit's speech
      Begin each sacrifice,
    Each lawful gift and self-denial
      With “Om” as their device.

    Denial, gift, and sacrifice
      In varied kinds are brought
    With “That” by them who yearn for peace
      And spurn self-seeking thought.                                 (25)
    “True” designates reality
      And also saintliness;
    The term defines, most noble prince,
      Auspicious work no less.

    Now constancy in sacrifice,
      Denial, gifts, is “True”
    While works directed thither bear
      The designation, too.

    Where faith is lacking, sacrifice,
      Gifts, works, and penance miss—
    As being “Untrue”—every aim
      In yonder world and this.


# Canto XVIII

## Renunciation is to he practiced, not toward work, but toward the fruits of work

< ARJUNA SAID:

    O great destroyer of your foes,
      I seek illumination:
    Just what may resignation mean?
      And what, renunciation?

< THE BLESSÈD ONE SAID:

    Resigning interested tasks
      The wise call resignation;
    Renouncing every fruit of work
      They name renunciation.

    Some sages ban all labor, as
      Involving certain sin;
    Some counsel works of sacrifice,
      Gifts, bleak self-discipline.

    Give ear, O tiger-man, while I
      With certainty define
    Renunciation's triple form,
      O prince of Bharat's line.

    The works of charity, denial,
      And sacrifice abide;
    Such works must ever be performed,
      May not be thrust aside:
    By gifts, denial, sacrifice
      The wise are purified.                                          (5)
    Yet even these works must be performed
      With no desire of gain,
    With no attachment—learn from me
      This truth most high and plain.

    Neglect of the appointed task
      Is wrong. It bears the mark
    Of insufficient sanity,
      Deserves its name of dark.

    Neglect of work through languid fear
      Because the job is hard,
    Is passionate, and fails to win
      Renouncing's just reward.

    But when a man performs his task
      With one clear thought: “I should,”
    Without attachment, Arjuna,
      In no self-seeking mood—
    Renunciation such as this
      Is nominated good.

    He does not cling to pleasant work,
      In painful feels no pain,
    When he renounces all reward
      And wisdom grows amain;
    So goodness enters into him,
      And doubt is cut in twain.                                      (10)
    For no man with a body can
      All toilsome labor shirk;
    But he is called renouncer, who
      Renounces fruits of work.

    Desired, or undesired, or mixed
      Is labor's fruit; and when
    Death comes, it clings to selfish folk,
      Not to renouncing men.

## Work is a function of matter; the soul should be free

    Next, sturdy soldier, learn from me
      The causative conditions
    (Five in the Sankhya text) that bring
      All works to their fruitions:

    The body; sensive organ; and
      The acts appropriate
    Thereto; the active agent; while
      The fifth of them is fate.

    Whatever act a man performs
      With body, speech, or wit,
    In virtue or perversity,
      These five are cause of it.                                     (15)
    If any dream (since this is so)
      It be his soul that acts—
    His lonely soul—he is unwise,
      Misapprehends the facts.

    He then whose inner being shuns
      The egotistic way,
    Whose thought is uncontaminate,
      May slay, and slay, and slay:
    He kills a world, and yet kills naught,
      Unfettered by a selfish thought.

    Thing, knower, knowledge are the three
      Impelling instruments
    Of work; while agent, action, tool
      Compose its full contents.

    But matter's elements divide
      All knowledge into three;
    So agents; and activities;
      Now learn details from me.

## The three kinds of knowledge

    One changeless essence permeates
      All life and can elude
    What seems division; knowing this,
      Your knowledge is called good.

    While knowledge, viewing as diverse
      The lives that animate
    This world of seeming-varied forms
      Is labelled passionate.

    Ill-grounded knowledge, petty, wrong,
      That cramps within the frame
    Of one small object all this world—
      Is dark, and earns the name.

## The three kinds of work

    Work done by one without desire
      Of gain, because he should,
    Without attachment, passion, hate
      Receives the name of good.

    The work of one who hugs desire
      In egotistic fashion,
    With bustling effort brought to pass,
      Is work inspired by passion.

    Insane, inconsequential works,
      Not heeding loss or wrong
    Or limitation of one's powers,
      To darkness' realm belong.                                      (25)
## The three kinds of agent

    An agent vaunting not himself,
      From all attachments freed,
    Still following where energy
      And resolution lead,
    Unmoved in failure and success,
      Is good—is good indeed.

    An agent feeling grief or glee,
      Impure and avaricious,
    Who seeks rewards for doing work,
      A libertine, and vicious
    In wronging life, is passionate,
      As judged by the judicious.

    An agent tricky, indolent,
      Unduly obstinate,
    Dishonest, and undisciplined,
      Even illiterate,
    Procrastinating, woebegone—
      Is of the dark estate.

## The three kinds of intelligence

    Now, Arjun, learn the triple form
      Of man's intelligence
    And fortitude, determined by
      The same three elements.

    Intelligence of when and what
      To do or leave alone;
    Of danger, safety; bondage and
      Release—as good is known.

    Intelligence that is confused
      In judging right and wrong,
    Uncertain when to act or stop,
      Bears passion's imprint strong.

    A darkness-dimmed intelligence
      Takes evil as its law;
    Or can, from any set of facts,
      False inferences draw.

## The three kinds of fortitude

    When acts of brain and breath and sense
      Obey a fortitude
    Unwavering through discipline,
      Such fortitude is good.

    Pursuit of virtue, love, and wealth
      In self-promoting mood,
    Yet earnestly, brave Arjuna,
      Is passion's fortitude.

    But fortitude that clings to sleep,
      Fear, sorrow, folly stark,
    Discouragement-is witless and
      Deserves its name of dark.                                      (35)
## The three kinds of happiness

    Learn next, O bull of Bharat's breed,
      Three kinds of happiness.
    That which, to custom grown, attains
      The end of all distress,

    Which is as poison first, and at
      The last as nectar seen,
    Is good. Such happiness is born
      In intellects serene.

    That which the senses' union with
      Their objects can create
    (A nectar that to poison turns)
      Is known as passionate.

    That which at first and to the last
      Bewilders soul and sense,
    Is known as dark. It comes to birth
      In sleep, sloth, negligence.

## The various duties of the four castes

    No life among the gods in heaven,
      No life on earth may be
    Released from matter's elements,
      The often-mentioned three.                                      (40)
    Caste-duty hangs from matter; each
      Is to one duty born:
    The Brahmans, soldiers, middle class,
      And even serfs forlorn.

    The Brahman's native duty is
      Faith, truth, an upright mind
    Peace, penance, purity, control,
      Wisdom, forbearance kind.

    The soldier's native duty is
      To stand his ground in fight,
    And valiant, brilliant, generous, firm,
      Deft exercise of might.

    The middle class is duty-bound
      To cattle. plough, and trade;
    While by the serf his duty is
      In menial service paid.

## A man should do his own duty, without thought of reward

    A man grows perfect when he clings
      To his peculiar work:
    Learn how he finds perfection when
      He toils and does not shirk.                                    (45)
    Man finds perfection when his works
      As unto Him are done
    From whom all life came forth, by whom
      Creation's web was spun.

    Far better botch your job than gain
      Perfection in your neighbor's:
    No sin attaints the man who works
      At his appointed labors.

    Let none reject his native work,
      Though little to admire;
    For blemish clouds adventures, as
      The smoke beclouds the fire.

    Attachment done, his soul subdued,
      His longings vanished, he
    Grows perfect through renouncing, and
      His labor leaves him free.

## Thus he attains the eternal Spirit

    Learn briefly now, most noble prince,
      How he, grown perfect, wins
    The Spirit as his resting-place:
      True wisdom here begins.                                        (50)
    With intellect grown pure, with soul
      Held firmly subjugate,
    Abandoning the things of sense,
      Of passion void, and hate,

    In eating moderate, detached,
      Enjoying solitude,
    In self-communion constant, with
      Speech, body, mind subdued,

    When vauntings and possessive whims,
      Desire and anger cease,
    And when from self-conceit he finds
      (And violence) release,
    When “mine” is meaningless, he wins
      The Spirit, wins to peace.

## And is united with Krishna

    To Spirit grown, serene of soul,
      From grief and longing free,
    He, level-eyed to all that lives,
      Gives his high love to Me.

    Through love he knows me as I am,
      And what my reach may be;
    So knowing me in very truth,
      He enters into me.                                              (55)
    Still laboring, yet all to me
      Confiding, through my grace
    He comes to an immutable,
      Eternal resting-place.

    Pledge every work to me; to me
      Pledge all your heart's endeavor;
    With discipline of intellect,
      Give thought to me forever.

## Man is free to choose salvation or perdition

    Give thought to me, and through my grace
      Pass perils bristling high;
    If, deaf in self-conceit, you fail
      To hearken, you shall die.

    In self-conceit you frame the thought
      “I will not fight”—in vain;
    Your soldier's nature, though you strive
      Against it, will constrain.

    Your work was born when you were born
      And you are bound to do it;
    For though, insane, you would refrain,
      You will be driven to it.                                       (60)
    The Lord, brave soldier, has his home
      In every living heart;
    His magic mechanism whirls
      Each puppet through his part.

    With all your mind, brave Arjun, find
      In him dismay's surcease:
    His sovereign grace will grant a place
      Of high, enduring peace.

    So have I spoken, so revealed
      The secret's final fact:
    Consider everything, then choose;
      And having chosen, act!

    Yet hear once more my lofty speech,
      My secret's secret heart:
    Peculiar love impels me thus
      My blessing to impart.

    Give worship, mind, love, sacrifice
      To me! Oh, come to me!
    You are beloved; my promises
      Are simple verity.                                              (65)
    Forget set duties then. Let me
      Your total trust receive.
    I will deliver you from all
      Sin's blemish. Do not grieve.

## The reward of following and disseminating the doctrine

    With scoffers may you never share
      This lofty doctrine's trial,
    With them who fail in simple faith,
      In love, or self-denial.

    He who reveals the secret's heart
      To men who worship me,
    Shall find in me his love's reward
      With no uncertainty.

    No man among the men who live
      Does dearer work than he;
    And none among mankind on earth
      Shall be more dear to me.

    This virtuous dialogue of ours
      If any study, he
    Has brought me wisdom's sacrifice:
      I speak with certainty.                                         (70)
    And men of unmalicious faith
      Who hear what others tell
    Thereof, shall gain bright worlds of peace
      Where righteous beings dwell.

    And have you heard the doctrine with
      A concentrated mind?
    Is all unwise perplexity,
      Bold soldier, left behind?

## Conclusion

< ARJUNA SAID:

    Perplexity is done;
    True memory rewon;
    My doubts are overpast;
    My purpose now stands fast;
    Your grace, unshaken one,
    Prevails. Your will be done.

< SANJAYA SAID:

    Such dialogue I heard, such words
      Of Krishna, spoken to
    Brave Arjun. It was marvellous;
      It thrilled me through and through.

    This high, this secret discipline
      I heard through Vyasa's grace;
    Heard Krishna, magic's master, speak;
      Saw Krishna face to face.                                       (75)
    That wondrous, righteous dialogue
      Between the noble twain,
    O King, is not to be forgot;
      I thrill, and thrill again.

    Again, O King, I see His form
      Surpassing the divine:
    A great amazement enters me;
      An awful joy is mine.

    Where archer Arjun stands, where stands
      The Lord most wise, most pure,
    There glory, grandeur, victory,
      And steadfast law are sure.
